
Macedonia; its 
races and their future 

Henry Noel Brailsford 

Digitized by Google 



o( tbe 

Tllntverattie of Miaconein 



! 



Digitized by Google 



MACEDONIA 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



ETHNOGRAPHICAL MAP of MACEDONIA 



II 




Reference 



^ . , ] Bulgarians. 



^ ■J'>r PomcLcks. {i.e. Mohamedart 

Bulgarians) 



] Creaks 
3 Albanians 
] Turks 
. yiai:hs 



Digitized by doo^ile 



MACEDONIA 

ITS RACES AND THEIR FUTURE 

BY 

H. N. BRAILSFORD 

AUTBOK OP " TUS BROOM OF TH£ WAR-OOO ' 



WITH PHOTOGRAPHS AND TWO MAPS 



M£THU£N & CO. 
36 ESSEX STREET W.C. 
LONDON 



Digitized by Google 



12 51 
.B13 



TO 

MY MOTU£R AND FATHER 



PREFACE 

/^NCE during the occupation of Thessaly I watched a 
Turkish trooper playing in the outskirts of Larissa with 
some Uttle Greek children. Ragged, unkempt, unsoldierly, 
he seemed a typical Asiatic. His complexion was swarthy, 
his nose curved and his curly beard set at that curious nni^le 
which one associates with Assyrian bas-reliefs. He may 
have come ot the same stock which followed Darius when 
the K;ist made its tirst assault upon European liberties. 
But the children saw in him only a kindly phivmate. They 
were completely at their ease with Imn, tearless and con- 
fident as they might have been with some great gentle dog. 
He too was happy, a mere child of nature, a soldier by 
compulsion and a conqueror by accident. He Hfted a little 
girl upon his shoulder that she might pluck the blossoms of 
a hawthorn tree. For a moment one almost forgot the 
barbaric notes of the military band rehearsing its tuneless 
hymns of conquest and of triumph in the square hard by. 
£kit suddenly across the road there appeared the indignant 
form of a Greek mother. She stood in the doorway of 
*' the Caf6 of Byron and independence/' and a shrill voice 
called the little girl by name. " Eleftheria, Eleftheria," it 
shouledy and the golden head of little ''Freedom" slid 
down from tiie Turk's shoulder. In the harsh accents of 
a scolding tongue, with words that were a war-cry at 
Mantbony the mother e]q>]ained that patriotic children do 
not play with barbarians. The Turk slouched disappointed 
away, and litde ^' Freedom '* gazed wistfully after him. The 
bop&m of revolt had set an impassable barrier between 
them. 



Digitized by Google 



X 



PREFACE 



The memory of ihis scene comes back to me when I ask 
myself whether I have succeeded in writing a fair book 
about the Macedonian question* My sympathies and my 
hiendshtps are not all on one side. The Turk in his shabby 
uniform, responsive only to primitive ideals of loyalty and 
honour, simple, courageous, dignified, and poor, is often 
a more attractive and picturesque object than the little 
huckster in European clothes who has called his caf6 after 
Byron. But it is my weakness that I cannot hear the name 
of Freedom unmoved, even ^en it comes tem the shrill 
throat of a Greek motfier. All one's aesthetic impulses cry 
out on behalf of the Mohamedan with his easy, incompetent 
nature, his indifference to abstractions, his aloofness from 
the busy ugliness of the modern world. But there come 
crises in the development of Eastern affairs when one can 
no longer dally with these romantic preferences. The 
Macedonian insurrection of 1903 failed in its immediate 
object, hut it created a tension which can only be relieved 
by the liberation of these miserable proviiices. At such a 
moment it is irrelevant to remember that the Turks have 
their personal graces and then private virtues. We are 
concerned with them only as a governing race — a primitive 
Asiatic people with gaps in their minds and lacuna: in 
their vocabularies. The creed of the rulers is "I iiiu" 
(i.e.f obedience, resignation). Their subjects baptize tlieir 
children "Freedom." With all the tolerance in the world 
we can only say that such an arrangement is hopeless. If it 
were the subject race which believed in resignation and 
the victors in freedom, one mij^ht expect some measure of 
hanpine^. Reverse the position and the results can only 
be squalor, anarch v, and misery. 

My main object is to explain, with what detail is necessary, 
the nature of Turkish rule as it aftecls the peasantry of 
Macedonia. The strife between the Cliristian races, the 
rivalry of competing empires, the devastation caused in 
one form or another by the idea of nationality — all this is 
interesting, but incomparably less important than the daily 
sufferings of tlie villagers who endure in patient obscurity. 
It matters very little whether a village which was originally 



Digitized by Google 



PREFACE 



neither Greek nor Bulqanan nor Servian is bribed or 
persuaded or terrorised into joinini^ one of these national 
parties. Pnit it dues matter profoundly tliat it should be 
freed from the oppression of its landlord, its tax-farmer, and 
tiit; local brigand chief. 

I have tried, so far as a European cnn, to judge both 
Christians and Turks as tolerantly as possible, remembering 
the divergence wliich exists between the standards of the 
Balkans and of Europe. In a land where the peasant 
ploughs with a rifle on his back, where his rulers govern 
by virtue of their ability to massacre upon occasion, where 
Christian Bishops are commonly supposed to or£j:inise 
political murders, life has but relative value, and assassina- 
tion no more than a relative guilt. There is little to choose 
in bloody-mindedness between any of the Halkan races — 
they are all what centimes of Asiatic rule have made them. 
I once discussed the Pjehnade murders with an "educated" 
Turk. Hut was a Paslia occupying one ot the chief military 
commands m Europeaji Turkey, and connected by marriage 
with the Imperial family. He showed his enlightenment 
by wearing tweeds and discarding his fez at meals, and he 
talked a smattering of almost every European tongue save 
English. He was, of course, profoundly shocked by the 
murder of a King and Queen, and I happened to remark 
that the crime after all was quite unnec^sary. " It would 
have been so easy," said I, " to arrest them quietly and ferry 
tiiem over the Danube into exile." ** Yes," taid he, ** it was 
Tery stupid. The civilised thing to do muld have been to 
imprifon them, and then quietly, when every one had 
forgotten about then^ to give them poison. Yes. It was 
a barfoarons act ! " In a land where the code of the more 
enlightened rulers is to nnirder with elegance and some 
regard for propriety, one must not apply the moral standards 
ol London or I^iris to the conduct o! their revolted 
serfs. 

The reader will e9q)e6t 9om little explanation of the 
drcnaistances in which this book was written. It is the 
frutt of some five journeys to the Near East, including two 



Digitized by Google 



xii 



PREFACE 



visits to Macedonia. The latter of these was particularly 
instructive, I spent five months of the winter of 1903-4 in 
the province of Monastir after the Bulg^n ri8tng» actings 
with Lady Thompson, Miss Durham and my wife, on behalf 
of the British Relief Fund. My work brought me into 
constant touch with people of every race. Going about 
among the devastated Ullages, examining their resources, 
assessing their needs, and listening to their complaints, I 
had opportunities which rarely come to the European tra- 
veller for learning something of the realities of their daily 
life. One cjf the many hm^uaL^es of Macedonia was already 
familinr to me, and previous experiences in Crete had 
initiated me into some of the mysteries of the Turkish 
system. We had at every turn to reckon with the 
prejudices of the administration, and learned much of its 
workings in our effort to carry on the rather delicate 
business of relieving its victims. Finally, though our 
object was purely philanthropic, and though we eschewed 
politics and sought to help men of all races and creeds 
alike, we did not escape the suspicions and the enmities 
which thrive in an atmosphere of falsehood and intrigue. 
To avoid the pohtics of the country one had first to study 
them. I have not in this book attempted to give any 
account of the relief work, but it is none the ics . necessary 
to explain that it provided a large part o£ the experience on 
which the book is based. 

I should like to express here something of the gratitiule 
which I feel to the courtesy and sympathy of the European 
residents in Macedonia who allowed me to draw upon their 
experience and information. I could hardly exaggerate my 
debt towards His Majesty's consuls, Mr. W. L. Graves, Mr. 
James McGregor, and Mr. R. Fontana, and with them I 
would mention the Rev. Lewis Bond, the Rev. E. B. 
Haskell, and Father Lucien Proy, of the American and 
French Missions. The kindness of some of the repr^ 
sentatives of other European Powers, notably M. Steeg^ 
M. ChoubUer, Herr Muthsam, and M. Toukholka, was the 
more welcome as to them I was a stranger. It would, 1 
fear, be indiscreet to mention by name the many natives of 



Digitized by 



PREFACE xiii 

MacLdoiii a, Moslems as well as Christians, from whom 1 
received both hospitality and assistance. 

Portions of two chapters have appeared in the Fortnighily 
Review and the Manchester Guardian, and I am indebted to 
their editors for permission to nuike use of them. It is to 
the Manchester Guardian's keen and sympathetic interest 
in the peoples of tlie Near East, that i owe most of my 
opportumtitb of lr:ivel in Turkey. 

Some of the photographs in this book have been most 
generously given to me by Mr. Bertram Christian, Mr. 
Henry W. Nevinson, and Major Salmon. 

To my wife, who shared our travels, performed alone at 
Ochrida the most arduous and pninful of the tasks which 
fell to us in the work of relief, helped me by her clear and 
tolerant judi^ment to form my views of the country, and 
gave me iier nid in wntmg this hook, a public acknow- 
ledgment of my whole debt of gratitude would be either 
irreticent or inadequate. 

Ram INSTEAD, 

December, ii/>$ 



Digitized by Google 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



. CHAPTER I 

CHARACTERISTICS OF TITBICISH RITI.R 

The Growth of the Turkish Bureaucracy ._ ._ 4 

The Doubtful Benefits of European Influence : 

Superiicial Imitation of Civilisation, 9. Ineftectaal Interference of 

the Powers, 15 

The Turkish System of Ascendancy : 

Limited Idea of the State. 20. Race and Religion, 22. FanaticlBm, 

2jv The Economic Hasis, 26 



Absence of Civil Order : Illustrations 


. 30 


Neglect of the Runil Districts 


. 32 


The Meaning of Fear in Macedonia . 


. 36 


Note. Law Courts and Finance 


. 40 



CHAPTER IT 



VILLAGE LIFE IK MACEDONIA 



Industry and External Conditions of the Villagers . , 42 

Tithes and Taxes . . . . . . -4^ 

Rural Guards . . . . . 47 

Differences in Prosperity of Villages . . . . .48 

Brigandage. Migratory Labour. 

The Land Question . . . . - Si 

Family Budgets. Food and Clothing. 

The Daily Round of Petty Tyranny . . , , 55 

XT 



XVI 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



CHAPTER IT! 



THE ORTHOnOX CHt^RCII 



PkClK 



The Church the one possible Political Organisation 


6i 


Power of the Bishops ....... 


63 


Secularisation of Religion ...... 


66 


Absence of Heresy. Indifference to Conduct Pofiition of Priests. 




Fatalistic Idea of Ond 




Religious Feuds really Racial Conflicts .... 


71 


Catholicism in the Balkans ...... 


7^ 


Note. F^rotcstant Missions ...... 


74 



CHAPTER IV 



THE RACKS OF MACRDONIA 



Mixed Racial Origin of Moslems ..... 


80 


Gipsies ......... 


81 


Jews ......... 


82 


The Dounme ........ 


84 


The Towns not Typical of Macedonia .... 


86 


Albanian Immigration into Macedonia .... 


88 


History of Macedonian Races ..... 


91 


I)is.-ippcarunce of Greek .md Latin Culture. Causes c»f Karly Decay 




01 Greek influence. The Comiiij; ot the Slavs, c>4. Orij^in ot llic 




Iiulc;ars, 05. The Hulj^arian Kmpires, 96. Servian Empire, 97. 
Eclipse of the Slav R.iccs after the Turkish Conquest 


99 


Are the Macedonians Serbs or Bulgars ? . 


lOI 



National Propagandas : 

Reasons for Servian F.iihire. T03. Weakness of Greek Claims, IDS- 
Notes. Physical Conformation and Climate ; . 



108 



Means of Communication 



log 



CHAPTER V 

THE RIILftARIAN MO VRMPWT 

First Impressions of the Bulgarian Character 



III 



The Treaty of San Stefano 



114 



Formation of the Insurgent Committee 



_L15 



Democratic Attitude. Careful Or^ani^atioti. 
The Committee in Bulgaria . . . 



118 



^ ■ --dbyGr ^ 



TABLE OF CONTENTS xvii 

PAGB 

Ideal of a neutral Atitonomy . . . ^ . . lai 

Karly Struggles with the Turks . . . . - IM 

Terrorism and Feud with the Greeks . . . .129 

General Tzoncheff's Raid . . . . . 134 

The Salonica Outrages ...... 13^; 

Hilmi Pasha's Measures of Repression .... 138 

Incidents at Mo;;illa and Smcrdesh. 

The General Rising of 1903 in Monastir . . . 148 

The General Rising of 1903 in Thrace . . . .156 

The Sufferings of the Non-Combatants .... 158 
The Psychology of the Bulgarians . . . . . 166 

Note. The Rival Committees . . . . . 171 



CHAPTRR VT 

THR V1.ACHS 

Typical Village of Pisoderi . . . . . . 173 

Place of the Vlachs in the Economy of Macedonia. . . 177 

The Vlach Language . . . . . . . 179 

History of the Vlachs . . . . . ._ . 180 

Women the Conservative Force in the East .. . . iHr 

Weakening of the Greek Connection . . . . 185 

The Roumanian Propaganda . ; . ; ; . 187 

Feud with the Greeks . . . . . . . 189 



CHAPTER VII 

THE GREEKS 

Castoria and its Archbishop . » . . . . 191 

Grounds of Greek Claim to Macedonia . ; . 194 

*• Bulgarophonc Greeks " . . . . 199 

What is " Hellenism " ? , , , , , ■ 201 

Vulgar and Literary Greek . . ; . . 204 

The Greek Alliance with the Turks . . . . . 209 

Conduct of the Greek Bands . ; ; . ; . 213 

Contrast between Cretans and Macedonians . . . 218 

Note. Greek Statistics . ._ ♦ 219 



xviii TABLE OF CONTRNTS 



I 



CHAPIKK VIII 




THK AI.KAMANTS 

The Albanian Character . . ... 


PAQK 
221 


Language and History : 

Sc.inderhe^. 231. Ali Pasha, 232. 
Customs and Feudalism ...... 




Religion ........ 




Re.isons for Conversion to Islam. 240. The Bcktashis. 243. 
Koritza and the LanL'uaL^e Movement 


248 


Prizrend and the Reforms ...... 


262 


" Old Servia " 


274 


The Future ........ 


277 


Grtik ;ind Sc-rvian Cl.iims, 278. Austrian and Italian Ambitions, 282. 




Albanian Pretenders (note), 286. 
Prospects of Autonomy ...... 




Note. Letter from an Alhanian Offirer 




CHAPTER IX 




THR PRORI.KM OF REFORM 




Revival of the Macedonian Question in IQ02 


290 


Policy of Austria ....... 


293 


Policy of Russia ....... 


2Q6 


Hilmi Pasha and the First Reforms ..... 


1,00 


The Miirzsteg Pro^^ramme ...... 


305 


The GendaniK-nc Scheme, 306. Financial Control, ^00. 
Failure to Pacify Macedonia ...... 


3" 






Russia ........ 




Sketch of a Scheme for International Control 


321 


Conclusion ........ 


332 


Index ...... 


337 



I 



-■d by Go f 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 



now a 



HlUfl. 



DUapi 



The Main Street Odvi^ 

"A Desert swept t>y a Hamcane"— The Wege ct 

Zagoritcfaani after the ritiag in 1903 
A Poor m«e of the nains. (Near Ochrida) 
Peaaaats from a rich Village. (Uskub) . 
Peasants from a pocH- ViUage. (Ochrida) 
A proyerons Bolgariaa l^lhige amcog the 

(Brasni^ near Monastir) 
Peasants Wea-vi^g near Ochrida . 
Aadent Ghorch of St Sophm (Ochrida), 

dated Mosqoe . 
Bolgsrian Monastery near Ochrida 
Monastery of Sveti Naoom, Lake Ochrida 
Ochrida from the Lake 
Mosque at Monastir 
The Mahi Sfareet, Monastir . 
On the Shore of Lain Ochrida 
Mediaeval Castle at Ochrida 
Tchakaiaroff, Commander of the Soothern Insoigent 

Corps. Taken dnring the Oocnpation of Kttssonra, 

1903 ...... 

An Insurgent Band in the Rising of 1903 
Tchakalaroff's Staff dnring the InsorrectioQ. He is 

seated on the lieader s left 
The Ruins of Zagoritchani after the Insurrection 
Ruins of Moki^i after the Rising 
Turkish Soldiers in a Burned Church 
Temporary Hut among the Ruins, Zagoritchani . 
A Home in Ruins, Djupanishta, 1903 
Temporary Chapel, erected, after the tNiraiiig of their 

ViUa^, k»y the Peasants of Lokov 



To Map, 31 



ft 

» 

M 
*» 

n 
It 

n 

M 

** 

M 

n 
n 



9* 

9* 

*> 
»i 

t* 
u 

99 

99 
$9 



36 
4» 

S3 

60 
68 



76 
79 
79 
99 
99 



148 

150 

159 
163 

164 
164 

171 



Mix 



Digitized by Google 



XX LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

A Peasant Cart . . . . , To foct f* 173 

A Typical Turkish Bridge ....,,173 
The Greek Archbishop of Castoria gracing a Turkish 
Review. Next luni ^tand^' the Turkish Caimakam, 
and further to the right, the Military Commandant . „ 193 

An Albanian Landscape (on the road from Ochrida to 

Elbasaii) 221 
Servian Peasants at Fenzovitch . , , , „ 262 

Mo km Types, Uskub Market-place . . . „ 262 
A Buli^.irian Village near Ochrida a year after the 
Inburrecliori, showing how little had been done to 
repair the devastation. (October, 1904) . . „ 31a 
A Village Conclave in the Ochrida District . • „ 326 

MAPS 

Ethnographical Map ot Macedonia . , . Froniispiece 

Turkey in Europe and Neighbouring bute& . . To face p. 336 



Digitized by Google 



MACEDONIA 



CHAPTER I 

CHARACTBSISnCS OF TUHnSH RULB 

HAT nothing changes in the East is a commonplace 



^ which threatens to become tyrannical. Assuredly 
there is something in the spirit of the East whidi is singu- 
larly Idndly to survivals and anachronisms. The centuries 
do not follow one another. They coexist. There is no 
lopping of withered cuatomSy no burial of dead ideas. Nor 
is it the Turks alone who betray this genial conservatism. 
The typical Skv village^ isohited without teacher or priest 
in some narrow and lofty glen, leads its own imperturbable 
life, guided by the piety of traditions which date from pagan 
times. It hears strange rumours of a railway which has 
invaded the legendary plain beyond its mountains. But 
the world of innovation lies outside its experience. Salonica, 
with its busy sti Lets, its cosmopolitan crowds, its steamships, 
and its markets, is ^liU a. turcica cUiiiate, whose strange air 
the hillmen fear to breathe. But the Turk>, whu in Europe 
at least are seldom a village people, are lu externals by no 
means so conservative as they were. They are a race of 
townsfolk, whose ideal is beginning to be the garish squalor 
and the restless pleasures of such places as Constantinople 
and Salunica. Sit bebide a group of youn^ officers, who 
are chatting over their coffee and cigarettes m a frequented 
report, and amid the strange gutturals of their Mongolian 
speech some borrowed words of French, incessantly re- 
peated, are sure to arrest the ear. it will be chemin dc /cr, 

B s 




Digitized by Google 



2 



MACEDONIA 



and then perhaps caje chan(ani, but the phrase which seems 
to strike a keynote is fin de Steele, Nothing is altered, 
perhaps, in spirit. Yet on the surface Turkey has chanj^ed 
within the brief space of a century, and nothing in Turkey 
has changed more profoundly than its government. We 
are accustomed to view the creation of the younger Balkan 
States { 1 11 rely from the European standpoint as a revival of 
nationahsm, and as the resultant of a long cham of ideal 
causes in which the French Revolution played a large part. 
But the wars and rebellions which founded the modern 
kingdoms of Greece, Servia, and Roumania owed their suc- 
cess in i^reat part to local conditions. The first decades of 
the nineteenth century seemed as though they must bring 
about the collapse of the Turkish Empire, not at all because 
of European pressure, nor even because of the spread of 
revolutionary ideas, but simply from an accentuation of 
centrifugal tendencies which had been evident for many 
centuries. It so happened that it was in fact two Christian 
provinces which won their independence, but more than 
one great Moslem leader came near to achieving the same 
success. Over Africa the authority of the Grand Turk was 
already merely nominal, and this was nothing new. Sir 
Paul Rycaut tells with some humour how, after a treaty 
regarding the AJgerine pirates had been solemnly negotiated 
between the Government of Charles II. and the Porte, he 
was sent to obtain its ratification on the spot* Arrived at 
Algiers he discovered that the Turkish Governor was a 
nervous prisoner in his palace, while the administration of 
the pirate-state was conducted by a turbulent assembly of 
local corsairs, who waived aside the convention with a 
superb contempt for the Sultan's suzerainty. When the 
nineteenth century opened, the administration of European 
Turkey was in the hands of territorial Raehas, who climbed 
to authority in the district where their estates and their 
influence were situated, and asked from Constantinople no 
more than the formal acknowledgment of a power which 
was theirs in their own right. Alt of Jannina was the 
most famous product of this system, but he differed from 
bis neiglibours and contemporaries rather by his genius 



Digitized by Google 



CHARACliiRibTICS OF TURKISH RULE 3 



than by his circumstances. Tliere were other adventurers 
who also achieved office by local violence and intrigue, and 
intimidated or bribed the Porte into acknowledging their 
rights. Sometimes they came of great families who all but 
inherited their posts. But it was no bar to Ali's advance- 
ment that he started life as a brigand and made himself 
Paslia by ^orging his coiniiiission of investiture. These 
local magnates exercised all but royal prerogatives, and 
even made open war and concluded formal peace among 
themselves. He went further, and became in turn the ally 
of Napoleon and of Pitt. If his final revolt was crushed 
after an interminable siege of Jannina, it was not l^ccausc 
the Porte had the force to overcome him, but l^ecause the 
local victims of his tyrannies conspired to take an overdue 
revenge. Not less daring was his contemporary, Passvan 
Oglou, Pasha of Wid in on the Daiuilic. He too was a hw 
to himself, and when the Porte attempted to depose him 
he quietly gathered a great army and prepared to march 
upon Constantinople. The menace was enough, and just 
as the Porte kept its counsel about Ali's forged commission, 
so it made its peace with Passvan and his legions. More 
than a decade later the Pasha of Scutari openly rebelled, 
and only a colossal act of treachery^ in which the chiefs of 
his conspiracy were massacred at a banquet, availed to 
check the movement. Egypt at this period became for a 
time an independent and even hostile state. Turkey, in 
shor^ was less an empire than a military confederacy, held 
together rather by the bond of a common religion than by 
loyalty to the Sultan or by the rigour of a despotic adminis- 
tration. The loose and incoherent structure seemed on the 
point of dissolution. The fleet was lost at Navarino; the 
flower of the army was destroyed in the massacre of the 
Janissaries, a species of Pretorian Guard, whom the Sultan 
slaughtered and disbanded because he dreaded their power 
and doubted their loyalty i the Civil Service was deprived 
of its most capable element, the Phanariot > aristocracy, 

» The Pbanar is the quarter of Constantinople in which the Greek 
Patriarch resides. It became the centre of a Greek aristocracy half 
liieiaf^diksat and balf nerGaatile^ which tent its services to the Ttarks. 



Digitized by Google 



4 



MACEDONIA 



by the Greek revolution, which cast a slur of suspicion and 
disgrace upon even the most abject and self-seeking Greeks 
in Turkish pay. 

From this universal catastrophe the Turkish Empire 
emerged strengthened and transformed, and more com- 
pletely Ottoman than before. The reorganisation was 
largely ihc work of a Vizier of great ability, Reschid 
Pasha, whose woik deserves to be compared with Riche- 
lieu's. The Porte became a real power throughout the 
Empire. The territorial Pashas were one by one replaced 
by the nominees of Constantinople, wliu liad no local roots 
in the countries which they governed, and were in l( >n e- 
quence the obedient servants uf the central power, Keschid 
was not nice in his methods. His Liberalism was a very 
superficial thing, and he shrank neither from treachery nor 
violence to carry out his end. The Turkish yoke lay no 
lighter on the subject peoples of the Empire for all the 
order which he infused into the administration. On the 
contrary, he gave to the 'system of Ottoman ascendancy a 
new lease of life, and added many a decade of misery and 
stagnation to the servile riestinies of the Christian peoples. 
But an advance towards coiiijjctence and stability his work 
undoubtedly was. His successors, notably Ali and Fuad 
Pashas, continued the new departure, and under such weak 
sovereigns as Abdul Medjid and Abdul Aziz there grew up 
a relatively strong and capable bureaucracy, controlled by 
ministers who enjoyed a certain authority and indepen* 
dence. If Turkey learned little from Europe, one invention 
at least she thoroughly adopted. The telegraph has done 
more even than gunpowder to perpetuate despotism. When 
the nineteenth century opened, nothing was easier for an 
ambitious Pasha who reigned at Jannina or Scutari or Widin 
than to isolate himself and defy Constantinople. The Porte 
knew little of the local circumstances. The news of a 
murder, a rising, a usurpation, could not arrive before the 
rebel had had time to entrench himself and destroy his 
enemies. And if news travelled slowly^ commands went 
no fisster. The greater Pashas maintained their agents in 
Constantinople, whose duty it was to bribe and intrigue in 



Digitized by Google 



CHARACTERISTICS OF TURKISH RULE 5 



their interats, and these men wm kept better informed 
than the Porte itself. The telegraph changed all this, since it 
gave the Porte^ under a rigid system of censorship, not merely 
rapid news, but a monopoly of news. The telegraph substi- 
tuted for the nearly independent Pashas of the older days 
a race of little officials^ destitute of authority and without 
local influence, whose function it became to sit at one end 
of the telegraph wire, to transmit incessant reports and 
receive minute instructions. A new type of functionary has 
replaced the old territorial governor. They come less from 
the landed and wealthy classes of the country than from 
the city-bred population of needy derks ^i^ch has grown up 
in Constantinople. The first step is to obtain a sinecure in 
one of the Minislriesy and promotion from this to an 
administrative post is a question of waiting and back^ktesh. 
Ability to write is the only necessary qualification to a man 
who can buy a post, and indeed iit^e else is needed, since 
the telegraph leaves to even tiie greater officials so little dis- 
cretion and initiative. These men are perpetually shifted 
from one post to another, and since they have neither fixity 
of tenure nor local influence nor even local possessions, they 
become typical placemen, indifferent to the fortunes of the 
territory they rule, and anxious only during their brief 
period of uncertain power to recoup tliciusclves by bribes 
and presents for the price wliich they paid for their posts. 
Only the more important officials who have their hands in 
the public purse can expect to receive a salary, and as resig- 
nations are raiely accepted,^ corruption is universal and 
inevitable. They are aliens and foreigners in the land they 
govern, more completely isolated from tlieir subjects tlian 
even the English in India. An Anglo-Indian at least speaks 
the lani^uage of his district, has as a rule some curiosity about 
its customs and habits of thought, and feels no active 
hostility towards its reUgion. The Turkish o£&cial in Mace- 

■ Even military officers are rarsly if ever allowed to redgn their 
commis!>iotis. They arc fxpected to be soldiers and notliinj; more, and 
if they happen to belong to one of the suspected raceSj notably if they 
ve Aibantans, they may beg in from year's end to y^afs end for 
permission to visit their estates or their native place. They are virtually 
ei^ks within the Empire. 



Digitized by Google 



6 



MACEDONIA 



donia, unless he happens to be an Albanian, crin rarely speak 
a single language ot the country, knows nothing ot the life 
of the peasants, and regards the political and religious move- 
ments of the Christians with a dull and uncomprehending 
irritation. The Asiatic Turk who comes unprepared into the 
Macedonian chaos rarely grasps even the elements of the 
question, and he remains to the end far more a foreigner in 
the land he governs than many a European who has mixed 
with the people of the country. Even if the Turk is able to 
conirerse with the Christian in a language which both under- 
stand, frank intercourse is impossible. The Turk desires 
only to be flattered, and the Christian is usually too wise 
or too timid to speak the truth. Such conversations are an 
elaborate game in which one party at least deploys a practised 
art in concealing his real thought, and the other is often quite 
without suspicion of the deceit which is practised upon him. 
To speak the truth to a Turk under any circumstances what- 
ever, even when there is no apparent gain in lying and no 
evident risk in sincerityi would argpe in a native Christian a 
degree of unconventionality amounting almost to original 
genius. There are conceptions in the mind of the native Chris- 
tian which no interpreter's skill will ever translate into Turkish. 

The system of centralisation as it exists in Macedonia has 
been cunningly devised in order to prevent the growth of 
any local opinion and to check the development of racial 
self-consciousness. The term Macedonia is itself seditious, 
and there is no administrative area which corresponds either 
to the modem Macedonia of the Bulgarian insurgents or to 
the ancient Macedonia of the Greeks. Macedonia lies con- 
founded within three vilayets' {i.e,, provinces), which corre- 

• The term " vilayet " may be translated province Its Govornor is 

termed a Vali, :ind has the rank of a Pasha (equal to a military 
General). There arc six vilayets in Kuropean Turkey — two to the west 
are Albanian, Jannina (Epirus) and Scuta.ri. Three in the centre are 
partially Macedonian — Salonica, Mooastir, and Uskub. To the east lies 
Adrianoplc. Constantinople forms a division apart. A large vilayet is 
subdivided into two or three sandjak^ the Governor of whidi is termed 
a Mutesaarif, who also ranks as a Pasha. Next comes the Casa (depart^ 
ment), governed by a Caimakam (prefect), who ranks as a Bey, and is 
equal to a military colonel. The smallest division isthe Nabi^(di^ict)r 
governed by a Mudir (sub-prefect). 



Digitized by Googl 



CidAKACTERiSiiCS OF TURKISH RULE 7 



spond to no natural division either racial or geographical. 
The Bulgarians are strong in -ill three of ilm Macedonian 
vilayets, but 111 each of them a. makeweight is skilfully pro- 
vided. The Serbs and Albanians are numerous in the north- 
east (Uskub). The Greeks arc well represented in the vilayet 
of Salonica. Greeks and Albanians balance Bulgarians 
in the vilayet of Monastir. The result is that no race 
attains a predominance, and no province acquires a 
national character. The natural arrangement would 
have been to place Greeks, Servians, and Albanians in 
compartments of their own, leaving the Bulgarians 
to occupy the centre and the east; but that would 
have been a violation oi one of the guiding principles of 
Turkish statecraft, Divide ct htipcra. The same plan is 
even more effectually carried out in the Armenian districts 
of Asiatic Turkey. It has its counterpart in the system by 
which any display ot vigour on the pnrt of one or other of 
these races becomes at once the signal for the bestowal of 
favours upon its rivals. When Greece made war upon 
Turkey in ^'^^ Bulgarians were suddenly permitted to 

create a number of new bishoprics. When the Bulgarians 
rose in 1903 the Serbs, the Vlachs, and to a certain extent 
the Greeks, were overwhelmed with official favours. 

The bureaucracy was at the height of its power a genera- 
tion ago, when the Liberal Midhat Pasha played the king* 
maker, overthrew two Sultans, and imposed a Constitution 
on the young Abdul Hamid. Midhat's democratic Con- 
stitution may or may not have been a sincerely conceived 
reform, but in this at least he was in earnest — he stood for 
a responsible ministry ; he intended to curb the caprice of 
the Sultans ; and though Turkey might still have remained 
a despotism under his rule, it would not have been an 
autocrat^ subject to the personal will of an irremovable 
tyrant Midhat was bundled into exile and done to death 
in an Arabian prison. The work of the Reschids and the 
Fuads was further sublimated into the Hamidian system of 
to-day. The administration already centralised in Con- 
stantinople has been further concentrated in flie Palace. 
The Porte is a powerless survival, and the ministers 



8 



MACEDONIA 



nonentities whose business is carried on over their heads 
by the Sultan and his favourites. The telegraph wires which 
used to end at the Porte now lead to Yildts Kiosq, and the 
rulers of Turkey are no longer such comparatively sane and 
competent men as the Grand Vixiers of the middle decades 
of the century, but the fanatics, the courtiers, and the spies 
who have won the confidence of the despot. Turkey has a 
working Sultan, and his very virtues of industry and minute 
application, joined as they are to an intelligence utterly 
uneducated and a temperament which is at the mercy of 
its fears, have become the bane and the ruin of the ehdxirate 
system which rests upon them. The administration is honey- 
combed with spies who enjoy the ear of Yildis Palace, and 
the terror of the reports which these pests have it in their 
power to make, paralyses still further the energy and the 
initiative of the provincial officiate. On the pretensions 
and the authority of the Palace, common sense imposes no 
limits. The very movements of the Turkish armies during 
the Russo-Turkish War were directed not by the generals 
on the spot, but by the Imperial amateur and bis court at 
Constantinople. There is alwa3^ in every Vali's jurisdic- 
tion and in every General's staff some subordinate who 
enjoys the confidence of a Palace favourite, and whose 
r6le is in effect to spy upon his superior. It soon comes 
to be known in official circles who this dangerous person 
is, and he rapidly acquires an authority larger than 
that of his responsible chief. I have hcarcl it said that 
there was a junior ofticer on the staff of Etlhem I\ii.ha, the 
Commaiidcr'iii-Cliici ui ihc ariny which invaded Thessaly 
in 1897, whose telegrams to the Palace actually took pre- 
cedence aluiig the wires over those ol tlie Field-Marshal 
himself. Sometimes the Palace takes u l\ antagc of the 
jealousies whicli ahnost always exist bcUvceii the civil and 
military authorities. The colonel in command of the 
garrisoii wdl telegraph direct to the Palace a report upon 
the equivocal conduct of the civil Caimakam (prefect), 
accuse him, it may be, of intriguing with the local 
bishop, denounce him as a patriotic Albanian, or su.4L;est 
that he is me£hcient and reaiiss. it is only where politics 



Digitized by Googl 



CHARACTERISTICS OF TURKISH RULE 



are concernedy however, that this active espionage has 
become a system* For, indeed, neither the Palace nor the 
bureaucracy is interested in anything else. In all that 
touches the economic affairs of his district, the adminis- 
tration of justice, or the ordinary affairs of police, the 
provincial official may muddle and mar as he pleases. The 
welfare of his people is not the absorbing preoccupation 
of Abdul Hamid. The cli Li ictLr ot a Turkish functionary 
is in consequence a matter ui rather secondary importance. 
A good prefect or governor may make his presence felt 
chiefly l)y abstaining from active or wanton oppression. 
He may redress a few mdividual cases of injustice. He 
may check the influence of the few local fanatics whose 
trade is violence and whose dream is massacre. But if a 
general persecution of one Christian race or another has 
been decreed, he must obey ins instructions like every one 
else who is bound to the bureaucratic wheel. To do 
positive good is quite beyond his competence or his means. 
He has nu surplus to spend and no discretion in disposing 
of sucii funds as exist. He could not, if he would, restore 
the roads, alter the methods of tiscal spoliation, or civilise 
the police and the courts. In every emergency he must 
follow detailed orders, and in tiie most urgent crisis his 
answer to a dilemma can only be delay. He must wait 
until the telegraph has spoken.' One smiles a little when 
the appointment of honest officials is suggested as a remedy 
for Turkish misrule. The cutting of the telegntph wires 
from Constantinople is the only radical cure. 

• ♦ • « » 

While the fobric of the Turkish State has been profoundly 
modified from within during the past century, the pressure 

* I firat realised what a power the tel^^ph is in Torkev after the 

Candia massacre of 1898, when the Christian quarter of a flourishing 
town was destroyed by the mob with the complicity of the troops, and 
a number ol the Eughsh garrison were shot I heard afterwards 
from tlic Director of the telegraph office in Gaaea (a Scot), that for 
tliree hours, while the fighting and the massacre were in progress, 
Ismail Bev, the acting-governor of Crete, occupied the telegraph 
office in Canca and maintained constant touch with Etem Pasna of 
Candia, and so controlled emy detail of the incideat 



Digitized by Google 



lO 



MACEDONIA 



of Europe has also made itself increasingly felt. The results 
have not been happy. Some scanty knowledge of French is 
now expected from the educated Turk. It is for conversa- 
tional purposes rather than for study. The censorship 
admits few books save the baser type of novels and only the 
moat superficial conceptions of Western culture filter in 
through the Strang vocabulary of unassimilated ideas. 
But in a vague way the bureaucracy has learned that certain 
institutions utterly foreigii to Its own civilisation eadsl 
among the greater Powecsi and for ends of its own it has 
attempted to imitate them. There Is a modernised system 
of law which attempts to compromise between the Code 
NapoUon and the Koran. The Ministries in Constantinople 
repeat at least the names familiar in the West There is 
even a Ministry of Mines and Forests, which has its officials 
In the interior. Only the mines and forests are lacking. 
Minerals there are in plenty in Macedonia and Albania, but 
in the absence of roads, security, and justice, they cannot 
be worked at a profit. The forests are what the goats and 
the charcoal-burners have made them, and if the Turks 
have had a policy, it was to destroy them as dangerous 
cover for brigands and insurgents. But the inspectors of 
this singular Ministry abound. It is as good a pretext as 
another for multiplying offices for the benefit of the ruling 
caste. This mutation of the West even extends to the 
adoption of purely huuuinitai ian institutions. Every town 
in Turkey iias Us municipal doctor, who is supposed to 
watch over the public health and visit the poor without 
payment. But he is usually a graduate of Constantinople, 
and his salary is always in arrears. There are al^so military 
doctors attached to every battalion. There was one of 
these at Ochrida, but since surgery was the one branch of 
his profession which he did not profess, wounded boldiers 
were attended by a local bone-setter, who kept an oil and 
candle shop. This comical anxiety to ape Europe has no 
other result than to confuse the minds of the official class, 
to burden the treasury, and to distract the Government 
from humbler work less hopelessly beyond its competence, 
and an inconceivable element of sham and unreality is thus 



Digitized by Google 



CHARACTERISTICS OF TURKISH RULE ii 



added to the normal atmosphere of Oriental corruption and 
intrigue. It may be instructive to give an illustration. 

Early in December of 1903 I went to Castoria to ascertain 
wli it kuid and measure of relief would be necessary in the 
burned and devastated villages ol ihe populous Bulgarian 
rcgioii round this Graeco-Turkish centre. Turks and Greeks 
were alike complacent. Shut up in the quaint city, isolated 
amidst its lake, they knew little and cared less about the 
misery beyond them. Riding out to visit the villages, I 
came first to Aposkepo, barely three miles from town. 
Every house but five or six had been burned, and the 
villagers had an unmistakable air which told of want, 
disease, and ebbing vitality. I asked for the priest, the 
teacher, and the head-man, only to be told that all of them 
had died within the past two weeks. Further inquiry, 
family by family^ showed that since the return from the 
hills after the insurrection, practically every household had 
lost an inmate from disease, and in almost every one of the 
wretched shelters which the peasants had built among the 
charred ruins of their homes one person at least lay ill. 
The prevalent disease was a sort ol maglignant influenza 
which resembled typhoid in its symptoms. Had the 
municipal doctor been to see them ? Yes, he passed once 
along the high-road, and they induced him to come in. 
He did nothing, and had never come back. I then rode 
on to a group of four villages further within the mountains 
(Posdivichta, Tcheresnichta, and the two Drenovenis)* 
Before the first of them was in sight a peasant from the 
fields, seeing a European on horseback, came running to 
meet me, and inquired if I were by chance a doctor. His 
child was stricken with smallpox. In the village there was 
no other subject of discussion. Here, too, nearly every 
household had its patient, and the children, with the skin 
peeling from their faces, were running about in the lanes. 
The old priest fumbled over the pages of his funeral register, 
but the task of counting the dead was a work which 
demanded time. In the other villages the same conditions 
prevailed. There was no doctor, no isolation, no suitable 
food, and the sick lay groaning beneath filthy blankets, on 



Digitized by Google 



12 



MACEDONIA 



the wet earthen floor under a dripping roof of improvised 
thatch suspended over crumbling and blackened walls. 
The prospect was appalling^ and an epidemic throughout 
the whole hungry province seemed almost inevitable. 
When I got back to Castoria I visited the prefect (Caimakam) 
and the municipal doctor* Both professed to be totally 
ignorant of an epidemic which had been raging at their 
doors for three weeks. I obtained the prefect's permission 
to eng^e a doctor on behalf of the Relief Fund and to 
start a hospital. A building was easily found, and a telegram 
to Mr. Graves, our Consul-General in Salonica, brought a 
prompt promise of aid horn the nursing Sisters of St. Vincent 
de Paul. 

But there was still the spreading epidemic to be thought 
of, and in an evil moment I telegraphed to Hilmi Pasha in 
Monastir, suggesting the placing of a cordon round the 
infected villages. It was a disastrous inspiration; for it 
implied a tacit criticism of the Imperial Government The 
reply was decisive and characteristia The Government, in 
its ceaseless care for its subjects, would do all that was 
necessary, it would even establish a hospital of its own, and 
our hospital would not be required. In all the centuries thsrt 
the Turks have held Castoria they had never yet dreamed 
of founding a hospital. The motive was obviously to fore- 
stall us. Hospitals in Turkey are supposed to be a peculiarly 
dangerous form of political propaganda, and to found one it 
is necessary to purchase an Imperial Fii luaii from Constanti- 
nople, a process which implies a banker, an ambassador, 
and a skihul go-between. I huiried to Moiia^iii and saw 
the Pasha in person. When I represented that the hospital 
was already an accomplished fact, that we had rented a 
building and engaged a doctor, and that this terrible nislitu- 
tion would only be temporary, he gave a reluctant consent 
on condition that we eschewed the dangerous word " hos- 
pital " and bound ourselves solemnly to say ** infirmary " 
instead. But as to work in the villages he was firm. There 
the Government would do everytliing, and a high Turkish 
medical officer with the rank of a colone^, one Fuad Bey, 
was despatched in hot haste to Castoria. A fortnight later 



Digitized by 



CHARACTERISTICS OF TURKISH RULE 13 

I returned. Our ''infirmary" was in working order under 
the Sisters from Satonica. An ambulance ^ich we had 
started at Aposkepo had been handed over to the Turkish 
sanitary authorities. Fuad Bey had come and gone, but 
the Mutessarif (Governor) of Kontza, a Pasha in rank, was 
<m fhe spot to watch developments. This exalted personage 
called upon us with the municipal doctor in his suite and 
an edifying conversation followed. A stringent military 
cordon, he assured nic, hdd been placed rountl tlie infected 
villaj^es, so tli.it no one could come out or go in. They 
were completely isolated. The epidemic, so Fuad Bey 
declared, had nearly spent itself, and the doctor had been 
abi' to find only six patients for his hospital at Aposkepo. 
" How were they doing ? " " Thaiik God, very well indeed, 
except one dear little boy who would probably die." (There 
were tears in the doctor's voice.) One of the Sisters was 
anxious to spend her afternoons at this hospital ; would the 
Pasha permit it ? The Pasha smiled and nodded, but the 
doctor siernly objected that she would carry infection 
through his precious cordon. 

"But," said I, "surely that applies also to your own 
. visits ? " 

" I never go." 

"And who looks after tlie patients?" 

"A male infirmary nurse." 

" Is he from Monastir ?" 

" No, a peasant of the village." 

Next day, with some fear in my mind of that impassable 
cordon, 1 went to Aposkepo to supervise the givin^^ of 
relief in kind, 1 had no thought of visiting the hospital. 
The cordon was oddly invisible, and as I passed the door 
d the hospital peasant women and children were going 
in and out. I asked them if they were the attendants of 
the hospital. They stared blankly. They had never heard 
of a hospital. I went in and found the place tenanted 
by the usual refugee families. One room, however, was 
empty, and on the floor lay six diminutive mattresses. 
That was the hospital. The patients were a myth, the 
cofdon was a myth, the nurse was a myth, and the little 



Digitized by Google 



14 



MACEDONIA 



dying boy was the embroidery of a myth. That same 
afternoon a deputation arrived from the four smallpox- 
stricken villages to letch the blankets which we had promised 
them. We inquired how they had contrived to evade the 
military cordon. It was the first they had heard of its 
existence. 

Some days later i was again in Monastir. This time 
I had decided to keep silence* But Hilmt Pasha^ seizing 
a moment when his audience-chamber was well filled with 
a mtsoellaneous assortment of visitors, including two other 
Europeans, expanded upon all he had done to cope with 
the epidemic, and appealed to me for confirmation. He 
listened grimly, thanked me with an effort, and promised 
to send back Fuad Bey and to dismiss the municipal doctor. 
From that moment our hospital, and indeed our whole 
work in Castoria, became the object of a sybtcmatic perse- 
cution, fostered, it should be explained, by the Greek 
Archbishop. More than once the decree went forth that 
GUI hospital was to be closed, and once a policeman actually 
called to expel the patients. Fuad Bey was now a fixture 
in Castoria, and with the aid of a competent Greek physician 
he did at last establish a Turkish hospital on a small scale. 
The only trouble was that none of the peasants would go 
near it, and they always replied, m answer lo our recom- 
mendations, that the place was merely a prison. In point 
of fact it had from hrst to last some five or six patients, 
who were seized by force at the gates of the town as they 
were coming in to our hospital. Patients coming in and 
out to us were on several occasions searched and cruelly 
beaten by the ?;olcliii s and the police. Our doctor was at 
first forbidden lo make his rounds in the villages, and then 
grudgingly permitted, after a consular protest, to make 
thein accompanied by Fuad Bey. Tliis gentleman was 
nothmg loth, for lie received an extravagant travelling 
allowance for every mile he covered. His function was, 
of course, the primary duty of every Turkish official — to 
spy. But he was as unfit for this work as for doctoring, 
since he knew neither of the languages of the country — 
Bulgarian and Greek* His linguistic equipment beyond 



Digitized by Google 



CHARACTERISTICS OF TURKISH RULE 15 



Turkish was perhaps some hundred words of French, and, 
since Turkish is not a language affected by writers of 
medical books, the sources of his science and the motives 
of his promotion were something of a mystery. The 
municipal doctor, whose salary was seventeen months in 
aiTcar, was not dismissed— that would have been too much 
good fortune. Lady Thompson, who had meantime arnved 
from England to lake charge of the relief work in the 
Castona District, was surrounded with spies in uniform, 
wdio took Iheir seat in the passages of her house, and 
iri>ist<.d on accoinpanying her even wlien she went for 
health's sake for a sail on the lake. Our sealed letters were 
opened in the post, and one of them was seen by a Greek 
friend of mine in the possession of the Greek Archbishop. 
From first to last the episode was an elaborate object-lesson 
in Turkish conceptions of government. Their absolute 
neglect of public hygiene is the normal condition. Con- 
fronted suddenly with European standards, the incompetent 
administrative machinery for aping civilisation is set in 
motion. It results in sham and unreality, of which Hilmi 
Pasha, arch-bureaucrat that he is, is himself a victim. Rut 
so slack is discipline, even in reformed Macedonia, that 
none of the guilty ollkuils ;ire punished or removed ; they 
contrive, on the contrary, to make money by espionage. 
The spies are as useless as the imitators of civilisation, and 
for all their activity their superiors know nothing of the 
real state of the interior. National jealousies make them- 
selves felt, and the Turks lend themselves readily to a 
scandalous Greek intrigue. A pitiable humanitarian farce 
ends in an outburst of sheer brutality. The suspicion of 
some political motive sits rooted in every mind, and Greeks^ 
TSaitey and Europeans move through a fog of deception in 
an atmosphere poisoned by race-hatred and ''propaganda." 
• • « » • 

So far as it hns succeeded since the Crimean War in 
imposing upon the Turks an illusory pretence of civilisa* 
tion, European influence has made for weakness and dis« 
niplion. It has had another and more important action by 
creating for the subjects of civilised Poweis a State within 



Digitized by Google 



MACEDONIA 



a State. The origin of this humiliating system goes back 
to Byzantine times, when colonies of Genoese and Venetian 
merdiants were allowed to settle in quarters of their own 
within Constantinople, and to enjoy the privileges of self- 
government. These privileges, much valued by the "Flank" 
traders, rested upon treaties which came to be known as 
the '^Capitulations." They were continued by the Turks, 
who had no wish to compete with Italian trader at a time 
when they neither feared nor respected the West, and 
probably welcomed an opportunity of encouraging the 
" Latins " at the expense of the Greeks. As the Dutch and 
the English built up a trade to Turkey^ these immunities 
were gradually extended to all Christians who were not 
Ottoman subjects. They were not very scrupulously 
observed, and the consular record:, of the seventeenth 
CLiitiuy show that the English Levant Company adopted 
a very humble attitude towards the (iraiul Signioi, defended 
its rights rather by bribery than by arms, and never dreamed 
of resorting to naval action, as the Great Powers do to-day, 
even when its agents were publicly insulted and deforced. 
The modern attitude towards Turkey rests upon Turkish 
weakness and Turkish defeats, and that fact is sufficiently 
understood by Moslem opinion. Protected by ins flag, 
subject only to the jurisdiction of his consul, the European 
in Turkey is completely in kpi iident of Turkish authority. 
He is absolutely immune from direct taxation, and though 
he alone enjoys securit}' for life and property, he alone 
pays notliing for the privilege. His Government will assist 
him to obtain "concessions." He has in the consular 
courts not merely a fair but, I am afraid, sometimes a 
partial tribunal. The consequences of a diplomatic dispute, 
with ironclads in the background, are so onerous that the 
Turks will frequently submit to sharp practice where a 
European is concerned. He can make money where a 
native, whether Moslem or Christian, would succumb to 
the burden of taxation and the rascality of the Turkish 
courts. He uses his privileges to the full, and not infre- 
quently abuses them. International finance, moreover, 
since the Russo-Turkish War, has turned the humiliation 



Digitized by Googl 



I 



CHARACTERISTICS OF TURKISH RULE 17 

of Turkey and the i>owerfula€S8 of diplomacy into occsp 
sions for wringing a steady and considerable revenue from 
a bankrupt anarchy. The railways, the tobacco monopoly, 
and the public debt are the largest developments of this 
practice. The same system prevails in China, and there, 
as Sir Robert Hart has shown, it provoked the Boxer rising. 
Before civilisation destroys a decaying Empire, it first 
exploits it. One could hardly exaggerate the sense of 
degradation and injustice which tlie self-seeking of Europe 
creates in the Tuikish mind. This irritation cannot often 
be satisfied upon the ^acicd persons ol ICuropeans, but, as 
in Cliuui, the native Christian, taken in qu mtities, provides 
an accepUibiL substitute. Of the tuUiities and hypocrisies 
of the humanitarian side of European action in Turkey it 
is hardly necessary to speak. The failure of diplomacy in 
this direction is now a commonplace. We Uavc seen the 
French fleet sail to Mitylene to collect the dcbis of a pair 
ot usurers, but no ironclad moved through the two years 
of the Armenian agony. » And the Turks also have seen 
it. They are hardly to be blamed if they refuse to believe 
that Europe is disinterested when she protests against 
massacre and devastation. To us this reasoning seems to 
lack subtletv. It is precisely because we are disinterested 
that we at c content with maction. But tlie Turks laugh at 
our proiessions of humanity, and argue that if we care at 
all about the fate of then- Christian subjects it is because we 
regard them as our instruments and the servants of our 
policy. Behmd the Armenians they see England, and 
behind the Slavs, Russia. It is not so mueh from fanati- 
cism that they indulge in excesses. It is rather because 
they wish to wreak upon defenceless allies and abandoned 
proteges of Europe the fear and the indignation with which 
the Great Powers inspire them. It is sometimes said that it 
is the sympathy and the encouragement which the humane 
parties in England and France have shown towards disloyal 

* Compare, too, our own action in Crete. We did nothing effective 
after the repeat^l massacres of native Christiatts, When our own 
troops were shot down and our consnl murdered we expelled the 
Turks. 



Digitized by Google 



i8 



MACEDONIA 



Christian races in Turkey which provoke massacre. The 
ineffectual but ostentatious protection accorded by the 
various consulates is a much more potent cause. The 
Turk is unimaginative and ill-informed. His newspapers, 
rigidly censored, do not tell liim when a m:iss meetmg of 
pro-Greeks or pro-Armenians has been held m St. James's 
Hall. But he does see with his own eyes the courtyards of 
the consulates thronged with petitioners and complainants, 
his own liege subjects, who stand there under a European 
flag, upon inviolable soil, to pour out their grievances and 
their accusations against him into sympathetic aUen ears* 
I have sometimes tried to imagine, in face of such a spec- 
tacle as that| how an average Englishman or a nationalist 
Frenchman would feel if such things were done in London 
or in Paris. The fires of Smithfield would be smouldering 
still if we had had to endure such treatment in our perse* 
cuting days^ and Saint Bartholomew's would be a modern 
institution. 

It seems to me not an extravagant conclusion that the 
weak but irritating intervention of Europe has caused more 
suffering to the native Christians than it has prevented. 
This system is not occasional, nor is it reserved for large 
and grave crises. It is followed daily in the interior ; and in 
such places as Monastir and Uskubi where few of the 
Powers have any subjects of their own, the consulates are 
maintained solely for the purpose of hearing grievances 
which they are impotent to redress. In some directions 
they succeed. It is notorious, for example, that most if not 
all of the Bulgarian bishops and their lay secretaries are 
involved more or less directly, and more or less voluntarily* 
in the rebellious activities of the Macedonian Committee. 
The Turks know this very well, but they never dare do 
more than place a Bishop under a sort of courteous and 
temporary arrest within his own palace. In one Mace- 
donian town I was on good terms with the Bishop, his 
secretary, and the Turkish prefect. The prefect one day 
explained to me in great detail the exact shades of revolu- 
tionary opinion whidi the Bishop and his secretary affected. 
The cleric was a Russophil and a P^slavist The kyman 



Digitized by 



CHARACTERISTICS OF TURKISH RULE 19 



was an ardent Macedonian nationalist, rather distrustful of 
Bulgaria, and profoundly hostile to Riis<;ia. The description 
was good and accurate. Rut knouini^ tin-, and knowing 
the overt practices to which these opmions led, the prefect 
has still to receive the Bishop at his council board, and to 
treat him with an elaborate and ceremonial courtesy. 
Why ? Because the Powers, and more particularly Russia, 
maintain him in his place, and would treat any attempt on 
the part of the Turkish authorities to punish or even to 
remove him as an occasion for serious diplomatic action. 
This is not a humanitarian intervention. There would have 
been no inhumanity in removing the Bishop. On the other 
hand, when the same prefect filled his noisome prison 
with peasant women arrested on trumped-up charges as 
dangerous revolutionaries, no Embassy stirred a finger to 
release them. This intervention is political. In effect and 
perhaps in intention its sole result is to weaken the Turks^ 
to sap their self-respect, and to hasten the day when the 
rotting fruit will drop into the mouths of the interested 
Powers. I was present one day in Hilmi Pasha's audience 
room at Uskub, when the acting Russian consul, a member 
of the Embassy staffs called on political business. It was in 
May of 1903, three months before the general Macedonian 
rising. The machinery of ''reform" was in full swing* 
The Pasha sat among a Utter of papers. His orderlies went 
to and fro in stockinged feet ^th cat-like tread carrying 
warrants and despatches. One heard the click of the tele- 
graph, and felt that the btireaucratic machine was moving. 
The great man scribbled orders on the palm of his hand 
while he talked, and interrupted his conversation every few 
minutes to hurl some telegraphic thunderbolt At last the 
Russian had his cue. He had come to protest against the 
wholesale arrests of suspected revolutionaries which the 
Pasha was carrying out all over Macedonia. It was indeed 
a i^itable reign of terror, but indiscriminate though the 
arresiB were, I doubt whether even a very malevolent Turk 
could make many mistakes. The Bulgarian movement is a 
national conspiracy, and it would be hard to find in all 
Macedonia a hundred professed Bulgarians who have not 



Digitized by Google 



MACEDONIA 



contributed wiiliiiqlv or otherwise to its fortunes. But the 

Russian would admit no snch arguments. To arrest a man 

upon mere suspicion was liliberaL To retniii liim in prison 

without a trial was unconstitutional. To propose to banish 

the heads of the movement by administrative decree, as 

Hilmi Pasha did, was an offence against the rights of man. 

The Russian was a jurist of some note. His pleading was 

eloquent and moving, and one only wished that it could 

have been addressed to the ears of the late M. Piehve. 

Hilmi Pasha was too polite or too ignorant to administer 

the obvious tu quaqtie. The argument was after all only a 

diplomatic circumlocation for something much more 

cogent — something about the arrears of the Russo-Turkish 

indemnity, or the movements of the Black Sea Fleet. The 

result was that the suspected leaders were not banished, but 

released. They went back to their villages. They worked 

very quietly for three months, and on the appointed day 

Macedonia rose in arms. This Russian action ■ would have 

been defensible if it had been consistent To make a 

revolution possible by such methods would be a relatively 

moral policyi if one meant that it should achteve its goal 

of liberation. But that Russia did not intend. She used 

the revolution, amd — at least indirectly— promoted the 

revolution, only in order to weaken Turkey. And that 

indeed has been the total effect of European intervention 

sinoe the Treaty of Berlin. The Christians are not better 

situated but rather worse, because their oppressor is weak— 

and for ever reminded of his weakness, angry, suspicious, 

and afraid-^Hutd for ever confirmed in his suspicions. 

Knowing that the Turk cannot govern, Europe permits him 

to govern, and renders his task impossible. 

« # • • • • 

It would be a mistake to dwell too long upon the changes - 
which a century has wrought in the faMc and conditions 
of the Turkish State, considerable as those diang^ are. 
The idea of the Turkish State remains what it has ever been, 
and the spirit ol its administration has been modHied 

' RoMis took the lead, but &he had the support of most if not aU of 
the otbw PowttTS. 



Digitized by Google 



CHARACTERISTICS OF TURKISH RULE 21 



neither by its own statesmen and sovereigns, nor yet by the 
influence and the pressure of Europe. The Tucks, liave 
never lost their tr:idition of conquest. They are still at 
heart a predatory and nomadic tribe, and they have in- 
stituted a settled government only so f ar as~ tRat is necessary 
to perpetuate and secure thek doismation. ,.Th^S regard 
their land less as a home than as a fief from w hich they 
expect to draw a tribute . Its inh abitan ts are aot citizens 
but.sub^^ts. No sense of a commonwealth has grown up 
in their minds to bridge this isoiation, or to cement warring 
races in a care for their common country. And indeed the 
Turkish idea of the State is so empty, so n^ative, and so 
amazingly primitive that there was no room for the growth 
of such common interests. In the original fabric of the 
Turkish State as it existed before the superficial and in- 
sincere aping of Western peoples during the last generation, 
there was no place even for civil law, not to speak of such 
comparatively modem functions of the State as the care of 
education. Turkey was a theocratic Power with a military 
basis. Each Church had its own canon law by which 
it settled disputes within the ranks of its own members. 
A s fqr the police, each village hired its own watchme n ; 
while education was and still is the concern ot flie 
Churches. T he military proper and the gendarmeri e 
were concern ed not so much with the preserva tion of 
orderj^ with Jhe. mgint$LnaLncs.gltb«. ayStWL oL as£fio.dancy. 

brigand threatened to_turn_into a patriotj then they^ had 
a duty^ B ut with ordinar y no n -po litical crime and 
violence they conc erned th emselves as little as with pur ely 
dv9?Kspules7~Tbe ^9te mi^t interest itself in roads and 
railways just* in so lar as ^ese possess a strategic im* 
portance. These were the limits of the old Turlush State, 
and in effect, despite paper innovations, they are its limits 
still. The taucttS are a tribute, the police are a garrison , 
the admrm stration exists only to maintain the au thority 
of the ruling caste. There are no terms in our language 
in which this system can be adequately described; for the 
feeble analogies within our experience convey no idea of 



22 



MACEDONIA 



anylhing so monstrous. The "ascendancy" built up 
before Catholic Emanciprition by tlie English "garrison" 
in Ireland did not approach it ; for the Englisli mmoi ity, 
however intolerant and exclusive they may have been at 
their worst, brought with them traditions of order and 
civil government. While they refused all political and 
some civil rights to the conquered majority, they did none 
the less maintain the State as an ()ri;anisation for the 
protection of the individual citizen iriTspective of race or 
religion. With the Turks it is simply a device to perpetuate 
their conquest. 

This a'icendancy rests, however, not upon race but on 
religinii. Few of the trieinliers of the ruling caste are 
really the descendants of the conquermg Osmanli Turks, 
They are mainly converted Slavs or Albanians, who have 
accepted the traditions of the conquest, lent their arms to 
the conquerors, and appropriated the rewards and pri- 
vileges of a distant triumph. The spirit of this ascendancy 
shows itself most clearly in the unwrittea law that no 
Christian may exercise direct executive command over 
Moslems, whether in a civil or in a military capacity. 
There are native Christian privates in the "reformed" 
Macedonian gendarmerie, but there are no native Christian 
officers. There are Christian Ambassadors in the Diplo- 
matic service, who enjoy the rank of Pasha, and an 
Armenian is actually at the head of the Civil List depart- 
ment But there are no Christian Valis or Caimakams 
(Governors and prefects). In one of the recent " reforms " 
initiated after the Armenian massacres the Sultan created 
a set of native Christian assistants or assessors who are 
supposed to rank second to the Valis» and to advise and 
control them. They are what the Turks call "Ewet- 
Effendim" — Yes-Sirs "•'-whose place in life is to assent 
to whatever their masters may think good. I knew the 
astute old Levantine Catholic who filled this post in 
Uskub. He passed his life pleasantly enough between 
his home and the hotel which served as a dub. I never 
saw him in the Konak (Government buildings) ; and when 
the Vali was absent it was not he, but a very junior Turk, 



Digitized by Googk 



CHARACTERISTICS OF TURKISH RULE 23 



who acted as deputy-Governor. The eorresponding 
functionary at Monastir, after some monflis of punctual 
attendance at his office^ finally took to hanging up his seal 
in an accessible place on a nail above his office desk, while 
he spent his days at home — 9, convenient arrangement which 
allowed him to say " yes " by proxy as often as might be 
necessary, without the trouble of sitting idle in his chair. 
Nor is it otherwise with the Europeans in the Turkish 
service. Von cicr (loIl/: Pisha, the capable German who 
ori^.inised the modern Turkish .ii-mv, never enjoyed so 
much as a fiction of execulive cuaunaiicL When he 
quitted his post, overwhelmed with the j^ratitude of the 
Suitan, he remarked to a friend of mine, "Through all these 
years I never enjoyed as much power as the commonest 
sergeant may exercise, nor possessed so much as the right 
to put an insubordinate private under an hour's arrest. 
And vet I was a Marshal of the Empire." Against Uiis 
stubborn tradition all the efforts of reforming Europe have 
broken in \'nin ; and when, under the present Austro- 
Russian reform scheme, it was proposed to place European 
officers in executive control of the Macedonian gendarmerie, 
the idea broke down because, as our own Ambassador 
frankly confessed, it was impossible to put Christians in 
command of a force in win eh three-fourths of the men 
were Moslems. The feeling beneath this absolute rule of 
ascendancy is ditticult to define. It is not the sense of 
racial superiority which we ourselves feel in India. Cer- 
tainly we should never place a native Mohamcdan oflicet 
over white troops. But the Turks will give a military 
commission to a negro without the slightest sense that 
white Mohamedans are thereby degraded. Their com- 
missioned ranks are crowded with Greeks, Slavs, and 
Albanians, aliens by blood and language, but professing 
Moslems. Nor can it be exactly a religious sentiment. 
If anything in the Koran really forbade Moslems to obey 
Christians, we should not find them such trustworthy and 
devoted soldiers as they are in India and the Soudan. It 
is the tradition of conquest ; .the conqueror is superior to 
the conquered, and it is an historical accident that the line 



Digitized by Google 



MACEDONIA 



between them is drawn by religion. The Turk feels, I 
think, not that the Christian is necessarily inferior, but 
rather that he is probably disloyal* It is a political 
distinction di^uised as a religions diflference. It was the 
same sentiment which in our own country dictated Test 
Acts and delayed Catholic Emancipation. Our own ruling 
classes felt that Nonconformists were potential and partial 
rebels, and quite logically they excluded them from power. 
The Turk, whose whole conception of the State is theocratic, 
acts more strictly and steadily upon the same principle. 
And indeed the Christians of Turkey really are what the 
Catholics in England were supposed to be. They are 
ultramontane& Their ideals lie beyond the Danube and 
the Adriatic. They cannot be in sentiment subjects of an 
Asiatic despotism. They draw their culture from abroad, 
and fix their hopes outside the Empire. The Slav peasant 
in Macedonia will often feel and express the same devotion 
towards the Tsar as the most old-fashioned Russian 
villager. The Macedonian Greek is at heart a subject of 
King George, and a citizen of the Hellenic kingdom. He 
feels indeed as intensely on this subject as the Cretans do. 
I happened to be in a remote Cretan villa<^e when the news 
arrived that the Powers had conceded the autonomy of the 
island. I was sitting with some peasants and a country 
doctor, the oracle of the district, in a wayside caf6, while he 
expounded the glorious news. The peasants could not be 
induced to bluue liis enthusiasm. 

What is this thing, auionomy ? " asked an old man. 

Well," said the doctor cheerily, "iL means that m:>tead 
of sending our taxes to Athens we shall spend them our- 
selves." 

The peasant reflected for a while, silent and moody. 
Suddenly his face lit up with a smile and a quaint sparkle 
of cunning. 

" Be sure," he exclaimed, *^ we'll End some way of sending 
them to Athens secretly ! " 

That feeling might easily be paralleled in Macedonia, 
though the Bulgarians have more wish for local indepen- 
dence than the Cretans had. But irrespective ot race the 



Digitized by 



CHARACTERISTICS OF TURKISH RULE 25 



eyes of all Macedonians arc fixed upon Europe. Every 
family has its own gods. On the walls of one house you 
will find a portrait of the Russian Tsar. Another displays 
the English royal family. A third honours tlie King of 
Greece or the King of Servia. A fourth puts its trust in the 
sovereigns of all the Great Powers, and one judges of its 
wealth by noting whether it has replaced President Faure 
and Queen Victoria by their successors. These gaudy 
lithographs represent nearly all that the Macedonian middle 
class knows of art. The moral can hardly be lost upon the 
Turks. They themselves are Asiatics. Their Christian 
subjects are Europeans. They dare not admit the intrusive 
West into the governing hierarchy of their State. This 
dread of the more powerful Christian world has nothing in 
reality to do with religious fanaticism. Indeed, we enor- 
mously exaggerate the part which pure fanaticism plays in 
the oppression of the Christian races. The Turks have 
never systematically tried to force the Christians of Turkey 
wholesale into Islam, as the Spaniards forced their own 
Jews and the Protestants of the Netherlands into Catholicism. 
By far the greater number of conversions have taken place 
through interest. The Christians wished to become members 
of the dominant caste and to enjoy its opportunities of 
acquiring wealth and power. The pressure of persecution 
and mis-government which brought these voluntary con- 
versions about was, I imagine, rarely directly consciously 
to this end. Occasionally, perhaps, a village in a peculiarly 
important strategic position may have been systematically 
oppressed with this purpose. Forced conversions do no 
doubt still occur and were once common, but these are 
usually the effect rather of malice and anger than of prose- 
lytising zeal. If a village rebelled, it was often felt that 
nothing but a forced conversion would punish it adequately, 
or secure its future loyalty. Women are still captured and 
converted by force with a view to marriage ; but there the 
motive is not fanaticism but lust. The explanation is usually 
father political than religious— either it was necessary to 
strengthen the ruling caste by adding to its numbers, as, 
for example^ by recruiting Christian boys for the Janissary 



Digitized by Google 



26 



MACEDONIA 



corps ; or else it was desirable to weaken a group of rebels 
wlio happened to be unbelievers. But the Turks do not, I 
thinli^ convert by force as Europeans did, ad majorem Dei 
^oriam, and from a sense that tiieir duty to the misguided 
individual requires them to rescue him from his theological 
errors. The nqp^ttve instance which proves that they are 
relatively tolerant in a somewhat contemptuous way is their 
treatment of the Jews. The Turkish Jews have no pro* 
lector outside the Empire; they have no political am- 
bitions, and they are so weak and so scattered that it would 
be absurd to fear them. They accordingly enjoy complete 
liberty for the management of their religious and communal 
affairs; they live 0:1 (xcLlicnt tenii;> with the Turk, and 
have iiu wiah to exchange his rule for tiiaL of a Christian 
Stale. 

Politics and religion have played their part in building up 
the Turkish system of ascendancy, but its basis is now eco- 
nomic. The doctrine that no Christian may hold aa executive 
or administrative post 155 entrenched bt*hind an impregnable 
barrier of vested interests. The Turks have become a 
parasitic race. Commerce they leave to Greeks and Jews. 
Manufactures are rarely attempted save in a few accessible 
centres, and then only by Europeans. For the sea tiie 
Turks have as little love as though they were still a nomad 
people of a continental steppe. In agriculture of a primi- 
tive kind they are more directly interested, but even as 
landowners their favourite practice is to leave the whole 
work of cultivation to Christinn serfs and to draw a revenue 
in kind, where they have neither sunk capital nor applied 
themselves to the business of supervision. In European 
Turkey, at least, they are a sterile and unproductive class, 
which contributes nothing whatever to the work of the 
country, and lives entirely by the forced toil of a subject 
population. The methods and extent of this exploitation 
form a curious study, towards which some materials will be 
found in the next chapter. Its most serious aspect is pro- 
bably to be found in the relation of peasant and landlord. 
It is enough to say here that this relation as it stands to-day 
could not survive the direct rule of Constantinople. It 



Digitized by Google 



CHARACTERISTICS OF TURKISH RULE 27 



depends upon the petty and diurnal violence which the 
retainers of the landed gentry exercise upon the villagers. 
A good police and accessible courts of justice would curb 
it at once ; while any humane Government would be com- 
pelled to modify the existing system of land-tenure by drastic 
agrarian legislation. Not a few of these wealthy landowners 
are doubtless uncomfortably aware that they possess no 
title deeds to the lands on which they have " squatted," and 
that knowledge alone must make them anxious to retain an 
administration which connives at their usurpation. Another 
not iaconsiderable .iaterest wliich sustains the system of 
Turkish ascendancy is brigandage, which in the western 
districts of Macedonia attains the dimensions of a staple 
industry. Yet more importajnj^is the system^ by 
which the collection of the tith es is farmed o ut t o lo cal 
magnates j^hQ_Jbid at anctio n for the annual privilege of 
d espoilin g villages. A ruthless man with de voted r etainers 
may gr ow 8peedil¥jich -bY.this method^ and it is in fact the 
foundatiqn. of the wealth of largg nnti^| pers o f Jhe local 
Turki^ magnates,. Time after time th e system has been 
reformed and abolishe d, but the vested in terest is stron cjer 

ih^n ihft fp^hlp lil^fii-yliiBi^ nf an nmsdnn il Vizier. The 

Turks are shrewd enough to understand that jf they 
ab olished tithe-fanning they would risk the loss of the 
sdpport which they receive to-day frqm tl?*? frtfySrsthe 
me n who feel when the Bulgarian peasan ts rally to the 
bands that thar w^th and position are at stake. F5f tbe 
^fyjfhll Ifiviff* t^i* tit^iry Af a viiliiigt at tht'^r^ vff his 
retainers is the same man who bums it in ti me of Jnsur- 
rection. I n the on ^ rapacity fc^ jg gf lied a tax»f armer , in 
the oth er a bash i^bazouk. Finally, there is the vested 
intmst of the officials and iht military officers. The army 1 
and the Civil Service are the only professions which a Turk 
of the upper and middle classes cares to enter. They are 
both a strict preserve, in all their important ranks, for 
M ohamedans. Reform in any shape means the end of 
this monopoly, and against reform there is mobilised 
accordingly not merely national pride but professional 
jealousy. If administrative and military careers were open 



28 



MACEDONIA 



to Christians, and if piomotion went by merit, their mental 
alertness and better education would either oust the 
majority oi the Turks or compel them to alter their intel- 
lectual habits. It is upon this proiitable ascendancy that 
the Turkiah bureaucracy reposes. It is a governing class 
which, whether it be olficial or unofficial, lives on the 
backs of the Christian majority^ and thrives only by 
governing. 

It is this economic aspect of Turkish misrule which 
makes all hope of any reformation from within entirely 
visionary. It is trae that the avera^^e Moslem of the u^jkm- 
classes in Macedonia is discontented. He is often even 
disloval at heart. But his isolation as a member of a 
minority and his lack of education render him peculiarly 
amenable to the social pressure of the caste in which he 
is born. I knew rather intimately a certain bey of Castoria, 
an Albanian by race. He was a peculiarly gentle and 
courteous soul, prodigal in his hospitality and universal 
in his tolerance. He had inherited his wealth, and used 
his peasants well. He was totally uneducated, and by no 
means clever, so that it is fair to take his opinions as 
moderately typical.' For the present Sultan he had an 
unbounded contempt He regarded the officials as par* 
venus and strangers, and would talk of them by no other 
name than "the asses of Yildiz." Although he was a 
comparatively young man (he is now dead), certainly 
under forty, his favourite theme was the rapid and alarm- 
ing decay which he had witnessed in his own lifetime. 
Turkey was "going to the dogs," and he threw the whole 
blame upon Abdul Hamid. He had often been offered a 
post in the administration, but invariably refused it with 
disgust. He knew that a catastrophe was coming, and his 
wish was that it might come soon. He desired a European 
occupation as the only solution which would give fair play 
to the Mohamedan minority, and he would have welcomed 
any Power save Russia, while his preference was either for 

• One can follow no other method with the Turks. It is never 
safe to talk politic!! in the pre!>ence of more than one of them, and one 
most know thorn well before they will talk politics at alL 



Digitized by Google 



CHARACTERISTICS OF TURKISH RULE 29 



Kngbnd or for Austria.' But, despite these opinions, this 
excellent man was a stout pillar of Turkish rule, and during 
the rising of 1903 he was indefatigable as the president of the 
local commission which managed the provision and transport 
for the army. Another bey whom I knew fairly w^ell, in 
the scii^e that I liad his confidence (though to him 1 could 
talk only iliruugli one of his satellites who acted as inter- 
preter), represented a very different type. He was clever, 
thou<^h quite uninstructed. He was by temperament a 
natural rebel and a restless man of action, and his sympa- 
thies were with the Albanian national movement. He was 
in the pay of Rt least one anti-Turkish organisation, but 
when I asked hmi if he had any tiioughtof taking part in any 
overt action against a Government which he certainly hated, 
he replied with naive frankness that he was a titlie-iarmcr. 
Other people did the same thing, he went on to explain ; 
he never ill-used any one who was really poor ; he knew 
he did wrong, but it was the only way of making money in 
Turkey, and if he did not do it some one else would. A 
more disinterested point of view was represented by a 
young officer, with whom I had many a long day's ride 
among the villages. He had a passion for education. He 
called himself a "young Turk," and his chief personal 
grievance was that he was forbidden to employ his leisure 
by learning French in the Catholic school at Monastir. 
Although of Greek extraction, he was certainly a patriotic 
Turk. He too believed that Turkey was "going to the 
do^/' and lamented the growing laxity of discipline in the 
army, which he attributed to the abolition of corporal 
punishment by the present Sultan. He was very bitter 
because as he put it, the absence of roads, of police, and 
of education ^ blackened Turkey in the eyes of Europe." 
He admitted that the Christians were ill-used, but his 
favourite theme was that the Moslems are even more 
mthlesely rq[Mre88ed, which in a sense is true ; for while 

* A Turk who knows anything of Egypt Is usmlly Anglophil. If he 
has friends in Ho-^nin he is Austrophil. One must make allowance 
lor pohtene^ in such convcrsattoas, but on the whole I believe that this 
CTWndfinfie \^ R«g^H i^* gaterai and atncttra. 



Digitized by Google 



30 MACijX)ONlA 

the Christians h.ive tliL-ir own schools ;ind their inde- 
pendent bishops, Mohamedaii education and the eccle- 
biasiical system is entirely in the hands of the Guvenunent. 
He was a just and kindly man, deeply religious and upright 
according to his lights, but his mind was a chaos of shame- 
faced and scarcely conscious prejudices. "We Turks," he 
said one day as we passed a burned Bulgarian village, 
"ought to have nstn as those men did." But when I 
suj^i^ested that the wise course would be to make common 
cause with the Christians, he cxcl unied with deep feeling 
that rather than tolerate a succe^stul Christian rising, the 
Turks would die to the last man and bury " their" country 
in their fall. "We came in with blood, and we will go 
out with blood." The tradition of ascendancy was ineradi- 
cable. He would admit that he had learned Turkish as 
a foreign tongue. He knew that three or four generations 
back his ancestors were Christians. Fanaticism he had 
none, and even displayed a curious sentimental reverence 
when he talked of a Christian Church. And yet politically 
he was Turkish of the Turks. For him the Empire was 
« our " country, and the sense of possession which he had 
acquired from the caste in which he was educated^ domi- 
nated all his thinking. 

While one might hnd some faint parallel to this spirit 
of ascendancy among the English in Ireland or the 
Magyars in Huiv^ary, its manifestation in Turkey is com- 
pletely Oriental. The. Turks brDiigfit.. with them into 
E urope no concgitioii of civil order, and they, have re- 
mained_ so jmich a militsijL ^hat they have hardly 
feit the need of publ ic security. They. ^OfiL . the 
right , tft, go while that is so, even th e police 

1 is one of those superfl uities whic h have been bprrgwed 
« uncompreEcnded jroim The average landow ner, 

i at .least .irT jthel more, disturbed .dfatricts, hag jJkfifift. hf«idff, 
jhis country house, and a bevy of arnae d retainerSj who 
' w^ their , reyqlvers ,cven_ .y3ule__ thcy^ , wait at his table. 

! H e would J hinl^'H ^inH{gntfi^j[ ff> g() ahroaH nnat»i>nHi%H, 

) and his name is usually a_ terror, which protecte him* For 
' the dwellers in towns there is another system* If they visit 



Digitized by Google 



CHARACTERISTICS OF TURKISH RULE 31 



the country they hire a mounted gendarme to accompany 
them. You take your safety about with you. The con- 
ception is amazingly priinitive, but it is thoroughly 
characteristic of the workings of the Turkish intellect. 
The mail-cart which labours once or twice a week over 
the ruined road between Ochrida and Monastir is always 
escorted by four or six mounted gendarmes. To under- 
stand an arrangement by which an orgai^i>tcl police and 
a reliable criminal court would make an attack upon the 
mails unthinkable would puzzle the concrete Turkish mind.^ 
As to r criminal vio lence, the law of private vengeance is 
stijr siipreme. We had in our employment at Ochrida 
an Albanian €n7'ass, whose duty it was to guard the relief 
dffnf and carry money or messages. He was recom- 
mended to us by the prefect as a quiet, middle-aged, 
respectable man. And certamly anything more intensely 
respectable it would be difficult to imagine. He slept all 
day, he was sometimes tired — sure traits of respectability. 
He had regular habits. He dined every evening with his 
wife* He always left bis rifle beside his boots in the same 
corner. He went out one day to dine as usual. He came 
back at the usual hour, and curled up on his mattress beside 
the wood fire. He seemed normal and at ease, and in his 
calm accents of every day he told how he had Just com- 
mitted a miircl( r. He had found his wife in some alarm, 
A drunken Turkish soldier had mistaken his house for 
that ol a Christian, and proceeded to rob it. Drunken- 
ness was a venial offence, robbery natural; but the 
mistake was an unpardonable insult Our respectable 
servant caugfit the intruder, beat him unmercifully, and 
flung him for dead out of his window into the street. He 
then dined comfortably, and strolled up to our to 
smoke his cigarette before turning in for the night It was 
only when the news came that tiie soldier was not quite 
dead that he betrayed any concern. But next day the 
expected event happened quietly, and all risk of a vendetta 
was over. We supposed in our innocence that our cavass 
would be arrested, but nothing so uncomfortable happened. 

' Seeiiot0 at end of chapter. 



Digitized by Google 



3* 



MACEDONIA 



It was afterwards explained to us that he was a popular 
local man, with many friends. The soldier was a stranger 
from Asia Minor. When the m urder of a Tnrkisii soldier 
in uniform in the miclst of a town can be re^^arded as an 
event beneath tlie notice of the law^ it may be imagined 
how little is thought of an attack upon a Christian peasant 
in some remote village. An incident occurred near Uchrida 
which illustrated this aspect of the matter. An Albanian 
went by night into a Bulgarian village and fired into the 

I house of a man whom he regarded as his enemy. He 
wounded his wife, his daughter, and an infant son. They 
were carriid as patients into our hospital, and this naturally 
brought the affair prominently before the prefect, an able 
and enlightened man in his own way, rather sensitive to 
European criticism. He endeavoured to arrest the mur- 
derer, but the village took up his cause, and the gendarmes 

I returned empty-handed. The prefect now decided to go in 
person, and marched upon the offending village at the bead 
of three hundred regular troops. This display of force 
was overwhelming. The village did not resist, but it still 
refused to give evidence against the guilty man. The pre- 
fect returned to Ochrida with forty or fifty prisoners, kept 
them in gaol for three or four days, and then released them 
aii. The incident was instructive, for the crime itself was 
gross. The prefect was the best Turkish o&cial i have 
ever met. He was actings moreover, under the eyes of 
Europeans, and during an epoch of ''reform.'' And yet 
to punish a simple outbreak of private passion in which no 
political element was involved he had to mobilise the mdiole 
armed force of his district| and even then he failed. In a 
country where nothing short of an administrative earth- 
quake can set the machinery of justice in motion, it is no 
matter for surprise that it is usually left to rust 

There is in Turkish administration a singular but 
quite intelligible contrast between the country and the 
larger cities. The cities are emphatically over-govemed. 
The administration pries into every detail of the daily life 
of the people. The streets swarm with spies, and it is as 
difficult to avoid them as it is to escape stumbling over the 



Digitized by Google 



CHARACTERISTICS OF TURKISH RULE 33 



dogs. In Constantinople the system reaches its climax of 
:il)>urdity, and the whole population seems to live by spying 
on itself. Even the Embassies are not exempt from this 
omnipresent parasitic life. I have heard a lady, who spent 
some weeks as a guest in the house of the Chancellor of a 
certain Embassy which is in high favour at Yildiz, describe 
how, on the evening of a dinner-party, two Turivisli officers 
made their appearance unannounced and uninvited, sat 
down, witliout a word of explanation, to dinner, and listened, 
as well as their linguistic gifts allowed them, to the lightest 
word of general conversation. If a friendly European 
diplomatist can be victimised in tJiis t;ishion, it may be 
imagined what is the lot of a prominent Christian digni- 
tary or a too popular Turkish notable. The cabinet noit 
examines all correspondence, and to such a pitch is the 
dread of conspiracy carried that the post-office will accept 
no letters in Constantinople for delivery within the city 
itself. The precautioii is characteristiG of Turkish stupidity, 
for the last agency of ^ich a oonapinttCMr would avail 
him&df for the transmission of oompronuiiog corre- 
spondence ie the Turkish post 

The country, on th e other han d, is earemp t from any 
sy stemat ic ^governgapnt It is inhabited in Macedonia 
m ainly by Bulgarian s, and the Turk does not see w hy he 
shoul d trouble h imself to,groyide them with the machinery 
of or der and security, Maryrfnij^j a ia a ^ndT of villag es. 
Hardly anywhere outside Albania proper docs one find 
little hamlets or scattered houses. To build an isolated 
cottage or a lonely £anii4ioose would imply too much 
trust in one's feUow-men. Nothing would be easier than 
to police Macedonia by estahHsbtng one or two resident 
gendarmes of good chaxader in all the Urgfir villages. But 
that is a precaution which the Turks have never adopted. 
Tbev leave the villages to their owa.device8> an d, if t rouble 
th reate ns, suddenly quarter troops upon them^ nQt.to pro- 
t iyt| but to terrori se them. ^ Iq Europe it is the remote and 
lonely situation which is thought unsafe. In Turkey the 
sone of danger lies rather along the frequented high-road. 
A village set on a hill^ or hidden in some inaccessible glen, 
n 



Digitized by Google 



34 



MACEDONIA 



enjoys a relative imnumtty from outrage, A village by the 
vrayside is the prey of every passing brigand in or out of 
uniform. We found when we arrived in Macedonia last 
autuouii at the dose of the insurrection^ that the peasants 
from the remoter viUages had all come back to the site of 
their ruined homes. But the villages situated along the 
high>roads were abandoned to desolation, and neither 
threats nor persuasion would induce their inhabitants to 
return. In two cases they even determined to use the 
opportunity to rebuild elsewhere, upon some loneher hill- 
side, where the visits of traveiliiif^ l\uks would be less 
frequent. I confess that at first 1 rather inclined to the 
view of the unsympathetic, who conjectured that the 
peasants were deliber.itely making the most of their mis- 
fortunes, and were obeying orders from the revolutionary 
committee in refusing to return. Further knowledge con- 
vinced me that they did not exaggerate the danger of 
roadside life. Riding one day upon the high-road from the 
busy little garrisoii town of Klibboura 'to tlie^raiUy^iy at 
Sorovitch, at mid-day and within sight of the town, I 
came upon a brigand seated on a bouTder "whIcTT Tie had 
placed in th^ middle of the road, smoking his cigarette, 
with his rifle across his knees, and calmly levying tribute 
from all the passers-by. Near the same spot lay the burned 
and deserteci village of M-okreni. Its peasnnts, more daring 
than the rest, had actually be,L;uri to relunld it. They had 
cut and dressed the necessary timber, workmg in Mokreni 
by day and sleeping in Klissoura at night. As.SQOO as the 
beams were ready the hyicki.hnvnubt: nf a nf»ighhfiiiring 

Moslem village swooped down at night and carried off the. 
labour of several weeks. After that experience the people 
of Mokreni reniained in Klissoura, admiring the superior 
wisdom of those who had made no attempt to return. 
There c ould a fter all be no more s weeping cnnd emnation 

of "a i^v^ml^nf fhnn fhic— fhat «af*>ty U pnacihU only 

beyond the reach of it? arm. 

The remoter villages do in th^ majn th^lr nmn lifp in 

their own way — ^provided ther e is no Mosle m settleme nt in 
their imn^iate neigh bourhood. Then indeed it is always 



Digitized by Google 



CHARACTERISTICS OF TURKISH RULE 35 



risky to stir far r^field to cut wood or to tend sheep, save 
in Albanian districtSy where distant errands are usually 
confided to the women, for a certain chivalry forms one 
of the many redeeming features in the Albanian character. 
But there are regions of Macedonia where one may ride for 
two or three days without seeing a uniform, or hearing a 
word of Turkish, or encountering a loyal pair of eyes. In^ 

su ch r^Ons a T urkish viyi^ ^ion is a rar<> anri fprrihTT' 

occurrence. The Government makes its presence felt on ly 
nrfierTTts "agen H^descend to cotlect the t axes, when a 
"flying" column saunters out to hunt an eli^ive Viebel 
band, o r a police expeditibn arrfves to gunttjf 
a ct ot defiahce . '^udrooKaio^ are infrequent, but they 
are apt to be memorable. I n one of several well-de fined 
way& t^TiT ^Mug^ iii?y * tt!**T Turki^ *fc-ffli1j|'^*y- 

Pierfaaps it has^ resenjted the violence of a tax-collector ; 
possibly it has harboured" an afmig^paf ty 'of Thsiifg ents 
^t\nm if ^"''^ "^t haV? m^ffM xunnlA « ^r^ again^ it 

may have caught ^nd Perhaps kil led a neigh bouring civilia n 

'''U^V-ffM ***** a<wfliii»^ aniiT? girl i>Llli£.pla<&e. In such 

' cases vengeance is slow, capricious, but sure. At the least 
all the men who can be caught will be mercilessly beaten, 
a t the worst the village will be burned and some of . its 
inhabitant&Jnasaacred«. The ** guilty " peasants have alm ost 

Cerbi nly fled Jo ng . hgfnrft thft Tiirk« arnw. Rnt their 

feUtives and neighbours must suffe r in their plac e. A 
village is always Md collectively responsible for the acts 
of its inhabitants, and the priest, teacher, and headmen 
are the chief sufferers. There is no system of police i n 
Macedonia. There are onlyjunitive exped itions. 

But in the intervals between these catastrophes the 
countrywide leads its own life of plodding industry — 
varied by conspiracy. In visitini? the villages after the 
insurrection one resdised how Uttic the presence of the 
Turks in some distant garrison centre pervades and per- 
meates their daily life. I more than once surpri sed a | 
village where the young men were standing. .^jout in 1 
groups wearing their insurgent uniforms. Tchakalarotf J 
and_ sev eral other Bulgarian chieis were still piuw iing 



• 



Digitized by Google 



I 



36 MACEDONIA 

about with the pic ked men of their autumn's levies. The^^ 
Grcclii, toq^ had a couple of bands on a war footing, 
and neUlier-iajcli5n scenicf! to be serious!;^ incommoded 
by the Turks. Within certain hmits, an3 subject to 
occasional but terrible reprisals, any armed force, brigand 
or insurgent, Christian or Moslem, may do as it pleases in 
the Macedonian interior. The Turks nrc not so much a 
government as a capricious and unintelliij;ent power ui 
nature. Macedonia, during the winter of 1903-4, was not 
so much a conquered province as a desert swept by a 
human hurricane. It is in these conditions that th e 
Bulgari an insorgent m o veaient has grown u p, a cori- 
stnictiVe organisation opposed to a negative and destroying 
force—a goveranient within an anarchy. 

» * • • • 

The government of Turkey may be, as one chooses to 
view i^ an instructive study or a diverting amusement 
The peasant in his brighter moments can sometimes see 
it in its aspect of humour, and there are to be found in 
collections of Bulgarian folk-songs some delightful satires 
on Turkish incompetence. But in the main it provokes 
less lao^ter than tean^ and the pervading emotion 
under the Crescent is a paralysing fear. But fear in 
Macedonia is more than an emotion. It is a physical 
diseasci the mala^ of the country, the ailment that comes 
of tyranny. One enters some hovd which a peasant 'family 
calls its home. In the oppressive darkness one becomes 
gradually aware of a living something which stirs or 
groans in the gloomiest comer on the floor beneath a 
filthy blanket Is it fever, one asksi or smalipox t And 
the answer comes in the accents of custom and common- 
place, He ts ill with fear." The word becomes the key to 
half ttie drcumstanoes of existence. Fear is the dominant, 
the ever-present motive. It builds villages. It dictates 
migrations. It explains deceits. It has created the 
I morals of a country. The Bulgarians are, of all races, 

! the most stolid and enduring; they seem insensible to 

pain, and proof against panic. It is no common shock 
which wrings a cry from them or unsteadies their nerves. 



Digitized by Google 




Google 



CHARACTERISTICS OF TURKISH RULE 37 



lor their physical organisation has adapted itself to their 
political conditions. And yet fear is the great fact of their 
daily lives. Looking back upon my wanderings among 
them, a procession of ruuied minds comes before the 
memory — an old priest lying beside a burning house 
speechless with terror and dying slowly; a woman who 
had barked like a dog since the day her village was 
burned ; a maiden who became an imbecile because her 
mother buried her in a hole under the floor to save her 
from the soldiers; a lad who turned ill with "fear" from 
the moment when a soldier put a knife to his throat ; 
children who flee in terror at the sight of a stranger, 
crying Turks ! Turks 1" These are the human wreckage 
of the hurricane which usurps the functions of a Govern- 
ment. And upon those also who escape, sane and whole, 
the terror sQts its indelible mark. In that world of night- 
mare a massacre is always possible. One can hardly spend 
a week in such a town as Monastir without noting on some 
peaceful afternoon that the streets are strangely silent and 
the shutters of the shops are closed. Is it the Jews' Sabbath, 
one asks, or an Orthodox feast-day ? But a glance at the 
names over the closed doors shows that it is some rite 
which affects all creeds alike. It is simply that most 
ordinary of ail social phenomena in Turkey — a panic. 
Some rumour has run round the bazaar of impending 
trouble, and every house has closed its doors. The 
calendar is marked with its appointed days of fear. It 
may be the montiis of Ramazam and Bairam when the 
Moslems are supposed to be excitable and dangerous. It 
may be Easter when the Orthodox processions are thought 
to excite their fanaticism. Perhaps it is the festival of 
Saints Cyril and Methodius when the Bulgarians remem- 
ber that they are a nation. Or else it is St. George's Day, 
when 8{»ing b^ins and the insurgent leav^ his winter 
quarters— the day when ''the snow melts on the Balkans." 
The occasion matters tittle— there is always a good reason 
for fear. The £oropean in Turkey, secure under consular 
protection, because he casts the shadow of an ironclad 
wherever he moves, is apt to make light of these fears. 



MACEDONIA 



But even he has his illuminating experiences. He wakes, 
perhaps, on some wintry morning to find that while the 
frost performed its secret ministry in the darkness, a guard 
of Turkish troops as silent, as unsummoned as the frost, 
had taken their station and kept vigil at his gate — sent, 
as he may afterwards learn, by the prefect who had heard 
that the Moslem mob had taken a vow to make an end 
of the Giaour. 

Massacres rarely happen. Even murders do not pass 
unnoticed. But the chance of massacre can never be 
forgotten, and the risk of murder is ever present. It is 
this rather than the actual oiitrai^es which makes the 
ruinous insecurity of Turkey. The native rnmcJ is always 
on the nlert to divine the uncertain developments of an 
event, and every incident has its penumbra of alarming 
possibilities. A Turk murders a Christian, but matters 
may not end there. It may be the beginning of some 
epidemic violencei some studied series of excesses. One 
assasaination in the market-place will suffice to close the 
bazaar and to sow fear in every home* And this has its 
influence on the whole social and economic life of the 
country. There was a village named Knisje, not far from 
Resna, which was burned to the ground during the late 
insurrection. The peasants, however, were sturdy and 
resourceful. They found a temporary home in a neigh- 
bouring village, and maintained themselves by burning 
charcc^ on tiie mountains* They had no need of charity 
until January. On Christmas Day two of their number 
were cau^t on the high-road and wantonly murdered. 
A week afterwards another of these cfaarcoal-burnersy 
going about his work, was met by soldiers and beaten 
severely* Ten days later I was in the village (Jancovetz) 
where most of the Krusje families had found refuge. The 
beaten man was still seriously ill, and I had scarcely visited 
him before there arrived some seven men of the lit&e com- 
munity, hasty and empty-handed. Some were Uood-stained, 
some lame, some bruised, some tittle more than fri^tened. 
The same soldiers from the same garrison had set upon 
them, armed, on the same mountain-side^ beaten them, and 



Digitized by Google 



CHARACTERISTICS OF TURKISH RULE 39 

robbed them of their tools and their beasts. It was the end 
of charcoal-burning for the winter, and the village of Krusje 
came upon the books of the Relief Fund. These men were 
not cowards. They probiibly had their rifles hidden some- 
where on the hillside agamst the next insurrection. But 
no Christian may carry arms even in seit-detence. They 
could only bow to the menace and wait for a distant 
revenge and a yet more doubtful liberation. In a society 
thus dominated by fear there can be no enterprise, no com- 
merce, no steady industri al \iicJ In the town of Rcsna, the 
centre of this particular district, there were several coinparn- 
tively wealthy men, who had no undertakings of their own 
which could have employed their spare capital. Ten 
villages in the immediate neighbourhood had been burned. 
The peasants were eager to borrow money, on the security 
of their land, to purchase piougb-oxen, utensils, and build- 
ing material. But no one was willing to lend, even at the 
exorbitant rates of interest (say 60 per cent) which rule in 
Macedonia. The risks were too great—brigandage, assasst* 
nation, and insurrection. For one purpose only would a 
usurer lend money — ^to assist a peasant to leave the country. 
Over three thousand peasants are said to have left Macedonia 
in the winter of 1903-4 for America. The creditor was 
going beyond the reach of the Turkish courts to an unknown 
land. He might fail or die or forget his bond. But the 
moneylender preferred to trust to his bare word of honour 
rather than accept a mortgage in his own district, subject to 
all the local risiks of violence and chicanery. There could 
be no more eloquent witness than this crude economic fact 
to the reign of fear and insecurity which is the normal con* 
sequence of the Turkish system of ascendancy.' 

' It is worth noting that all the incidents recorded in this chapter 
happened in "reformed" Macedonia after the promulgation of the 
MwEsteg programme. 

' The result of the insecurity of the roads is that travelling in Mace- 
donia is reduced to a minimum. An irritating and expensive system of 
passports restricts free circulation between one province (vilayet) and 
another. The peasants, who have less to fear from robbers than the 
middle classes, are the least incommoded, but even they dread a 
journey. Where railways have not yet penetrated, there is so little 
mtercommunication between one town and another, Uiat 00 system of 



Digitized by Google 



AO 



MACEDONIA 



NOTE TO CHAPTER I 



§ L4W COURTS AND FINANCE 



On reading over this general chapter on Turkish rule I notice that I 
have snid little or nothinf^ ahotit the administration justice, and, 
beyond detcnding the ooiission, I have not much to add. One often 
reads about Che terrible abnsea of tbt TtarUsh cotirts, but I can hardly 
recall an instance in which I have ever heard any one in Turkey talking 
of the court'- -t< a real factor in his daily lite. Tin y are so thoroughly 
bad and corrupt that no one ever dreams of iuviug recourse to theai 
for the redress of aa injury, and it is exceedin^y interesting to note 
how well, on the whole, society manages without law courts. I do not 
think there is more trickery or injustice between man and man in 
Ifacedonia than there is in Europe — always excepting the relationship 
between Tods and their Christian depenctents. But it would be better 
if there were no civil courts at all, for at present the wealthy of both 
Creeds, who can aftord to bribe, are apt to use them as a m^uos of over- 
reaching the poor. As for the criminal courts, they are so moch n 
mere department of the executive that they can hardly be said to exist. 
A m.*n mnv he imprisoned for months or years without a trial, and as 
often as uui he is released without a trial — particularly it his friends 
have managed to collect a sufficiently handsome bribe. When a trial 
does take place before judj^es who are as corrupt and ignorant as they 
are subservient and prejudiced, it is, as a rule, a mere formaUty, 
particularly if the accused is a Christian. It is not accurate to say, as 
IS sometimes done, that the word of a Christian is not admitted as 
evidence, but it is true that no evidence is considered it all unless it 
coohrms the preconceptions of the court. The Christians occasionaliv 
attempt to set up private tribunals of tbeir own to judge disputes whicn 
arise among themselves, and the Bulgarian Revolutionary Committee, 
alwavs anxious to act as a State within the State, encouraj»es tfie^e 
experiments, but they are always regarded as highly seditious and 
punished accordingly. 

Turkish finance, on the other hand, would make a curiou'^ nnd 
amusing subject for study, bat really when one has said that everythipg 
is chaotic and ccvrupt, it is scarcely necessary to go into dda£ 
Stnpidity and rascality are almost equally to blame. The officials are 



stage coaches or public diligences exists— partly because travellers are 
few, and partly because the roods are alwajrs onsafie and frequently 

impassable. The townsfolk of the wealthier classes rarely dare to visit 



owned several famu not many miles from the town, which in all his life 

he had never visited. A Greek in Monastir, who drew all his income 
from his farms, had let five years elapse without once inspecting them, 
A Bulgarian in Resna, who had a large estate about six mileb from the 
town, was much concerned to know how far it had been damaged 
during the insurrection, but though he was certainty not a timid man, 
he allowed nine months at teast to pass without going to see iL To 
travel at all la winter is thoqght to be foolhardy ; to travel after dark it 
treated as a dear proof of iofluiity. 



the country at ail. 1 knew a Bui 




Ochrida, an old man, who 



Digitized by Google 



CHAKACTiiRlSTlCS OF TURKISH KULE 41 



qaite teonuit of aocouots, and indeed to keep accurate ledgers in the 
TWkisn language mnild be difiBcult. 

Provincial finance suffers under the two main evils — (a) the tithes in a 
vezy large number of districts are morlgaged to provide the interest on 
llie Otionuui PnMic Debt (b) The provinces are never treated at 
self-contained units with local budgets of their own. At any moment 
they may be called upon to pay a draft, kno wn ns :x " havaleh, " which 
has bcren drawii against their treasuries by tiic iinpcrial GovcrnmenL 
These drafts are given without any preliminary inquiry as to whether, 
the province in question has a real surplus after meeting its own obliga- 
tions — ^it is enough that it has some cash in its cbe:st or can raise it by 
taintiou . 

It must not be supposed that the excessive burdens which the 
individual has to pay really goto enrich the State. The tax-collector 
defrauds his mai>ter as well as his victims. A favourite device is to 
learve m mtm in peace for several years, and then suddenly to demand 
the arrears of his house-tax or of the tax on wages or even of the 
capitation tax. He cannot pay, but to avoid being thrown into prison 
he will givt; a substantial backs^luesh to the official. Sometimes iu return 
for a bnbe the collector will assess a substantial three-storey honse at a 
lower fignre than he imposes on a mud-cabin. Of the customs, every 
ttravelJer who has paid the dollar which is openly demanded of him by 
llie revemie officer who racamines his trunk in the railway station at 
Cbostantinopl^ will form his own impressions. But one need not 
accumulate examples. It is a system which wrongs every one con- 
c^oed. The official receives no salaiy, and he rob« the £jcchequer 
and the citizen with an impartial haaiL 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER 11 



VILLAGE UF£ IN MAC£DONlA 

IT was once my good fortune to obtain from the Vali of 
S ilonica an explanation of the Macedonian problem 
as concise as it was true. "It is all the fault of the 
Bulgarian schools," he dechu t ci. "In these nests of vice 
the sons of the peasants are maintained for a number of 
years in idleness and iuxurv. liuiccd, they actually sleep on 
beds. And then they go back to their villages. There are 
no beds in their fathers' cottages, and these young gentle- 
men are much too fine to sleep on the floor. They try the 
life for a little, and then they go off and join the revolu- 
tionary bands. What they want is a nice fat Government 
appointment." The Vali succeeded in condensing in these 
brief and characteristic sentences the main facts of the 
situation, and his summary had the merit of illustrating not 
merely the Bulgarian, but also the Turkish standpoint. 
The question of beds (to adopt the Vadi's formula) is at the 
root of the Macedonian difficulty. The mottve o£ revolt, tn 
other words, lies as much in the economic grievances of 
the peasantry as in the political aspirations of the educated 
class. In a land which ought to be one of the richest 
comers of Europe the villagiers are sunk in a hopeless 
poverty— a poverty, moreover, which their rulers regard as 
their natural and predestined lot On the other hand, there 
are the Bulgarian schools busily at work in every important 
centre and engaged in giving to thousands of teachable lads 
an education which would fit them for a modem and 
civilised society. They leave the school to plunge into the 
Middle Ages. There ts no scope for their energy in their 

4« 



Digitized by GoogI 




Google 



VILLAGE UFE IN MACEDONIA 43 



nafivte village. Official careers are closed to them, and in 
the long run, finding themselves unfitted for their environ- 
ment, the only course which remains to them is to alter the 
environment itself. It is this stagnation, tcnipered by 
anarchy and varied by famine, which is ihc vciil fact behind 
Maccdoiiia.n revolts. The massacres and atrocities on which 
Europe is apt to fix its attention are only the byiuptoius of a 
much graver and more chronic disorder. They are not the 
causes, but the consequences of revohition. If one would 
know why it is that the peasants acquue arms, enrol them- 
selves in bands and expose themselves to the hazards of a 
general rising, one must inquire a little into the daily 
realities of village life. 

There is nothing in the approach to the average Mace- 
donian village to suggest poverty or distress. It is a genial 
climate, and the soil will grow all that the peasant need use 
and much that he might export. Kice dourishes in the low- 
lying plains. Maize has foimd a second home in these 
regions, and wheat is nearly everywhere abundant. Wine, 
tobacco, and opium yield a plentiful revenue ; and to reach 
the village you must often pierce through a thick verdure of 
fruit trees. On the downs around it you will meet the lads 
of the hamlet playing on their home-made flutes of reed 
among a herd of sheep. In the ponds and ditches outside 
it hideous black buffaloes with white eyes are standing 
immersed in mud. Pigs tumble against your legs^ the only 
creatures which seem quite free^ since no Moslem marauder 
will touch them. There is an air ol obtrusive untidiness^ 
but even untidiness demands a certain quantity of gear. 
The houses are of mud, or in a hilly country of rough 
undressed stone. The roofs are carelessly thatched and 
everything speaks of squalor, but it is none the less a 
disorder which brilliant sunshine and bahny air may render 
picturesque. It is only when you hint that you would like 
to rest for a while beneath a roof that the revelation l)egin8. 
The villagers^ from an instinct ol hospitality^ will conduct 
you to the house of the wealthiest inhabitant ; but in truth 
the shades of difference are imperceptible to the eyes of a 
stranger. Windows are often non-existent^ and where they 



Digitized by Google 



+4 



MACEDONIA 



• 

I 



are to be fottiid they are oDoesnvdy atnall. The floor is ol 
undulating earth, and lor beds there are home-made mats 
of stcaw. A three-legged stool or two and a few pots of 
earthenware or tin are all the property that is visible* There 
may perhaps be a bos which contains the home-made gala 
dresses of the women. One by one the family flodEs in, and 
presently it dawns upon you that in the obscurity of this 
single room dwell, it may be, seventeen or eighteen persons 
— married couples of two generations, and young diildren 
of three or four mothers. And then at length one realises 
the meaning of the Vah's economic theory. Late and 
early, winter and summer, these seventeen peasants are out 
in the iickls, plan hug Ihctr maize aiui tobacco with scrupu- 
lous fingers, driving behind the wo'Klcn plough the old ox 
on whose liic hangs the iiupc of harvest, cuttini^ wood oa 
the mountain leagues away, or, it may be, tramping ten 
miles to market to sell six eggs for threepence — and here 
are ihc iiuds of their toil. The labour and the parsimony 
of generations, the joint work of brothers and sisters, the 
inheritance of a whole growing tribe of little ones — thev are 
all represented by the mud hovel with the earthen pots and 
the mats of straw\ 

What, then, becomes of all the stolid mdustry of the 
Macedonian peasant ? Watch him from your train as it 
creeps through the country in the gt ey dawn, and :is soon 
as you can see anything you will sec him faruig aiu ld with 
his oxen and his plough. He takes no siesta at noon, and 
he labours till sundown. Much of his foil no doubt is 
unremuiierative and he can seldom reach tiie best market. 
His plough is the wooden thing which Cain may have used 
in Eden, and the roads that should bring his produce to 
town serve also as channels for the winter cataracts. But 
for all that, he makes much wealth which he does not enjoy. 
His first complaint to you will be of the tax-collector. The 
fiscal system of Turkey begins with a heavy indirect tax 
ol 8 or II per cent, on ail imports— a serious burden, 
sinoe it is levied not only upon ^reign produce^ but even 
upon native merchandise transported from one Turkish 
province to another. It rakes in a little gun by a monopoly 



Digitized by Google 



VILLAGE UbE IN MACEDONIA 



of tobacco. But it presses on the peasaiU chiefly by direct 
imposts wliicli must be paid in cash. There are taxes on 
landed property, on cattle, on sheep, and on fruit trees, 
tithes on every species of harvest, and a poll-tax to which 
only Christians are liable, amounting to ten shillings per 
annum for every male. To complete these exactions with a 
touch of irony, there is also an education tax and a heavy 
road-tax for the maintenance of the indescribable highways. 

In a certain typical village called Mavrovo (C a/a Tetovo) 
some careful investigations made by one member of the 
consular corps in Uskub and checked md^ [^l ndcntly by a 
colleague, went to show that the average peasant family 
could count, after satisfyini^ the landlord and tax-qntherer, 
on a net income of about /"lo. In direct taxes under all 
heads this village of 150 houses paid £T^}o, or about 
£^ los. for each household. But it is only when one looks 
at the items of the account that one realises how oppressive 
tlie total was in fact. 

The main impost is the tithe on the harvest. The Govern- 
ment is much too indolent to collect it directly. Every year 
the tithes of each village are put up to auction and knocked 
down to the highest bidder. He may be a Jew speculator^ 
but more often he is some wealthy bdy of the neighbour- 
hood. He makes his profit as he pleases, and the amount 
which he pays into the treasury for the right of collection 
bears very Uttle relation indeed to the amount which he 
really collects This system of tax-farming has been 
abolisfaed more than once by Imperial decrees. It persists 
lor two very sufficient reasons. In the first place it serves 
to keep the local Mohamedan gentry loyal. This is 
particularly fiie case when they happen to be Albanians 
They detest the TurkSy they dislike tiie Sultan, and they 
discuss his creatures with the utmost freedom, tnit the 
profits which they draw from corruption make them passive 
and tolerant malcontents. In the second pkice the system 
survives because the bureaucracy also profits by it If a 
tax-farmer has been notoriously tyrannical, he can always 
be made to disgorge a portion of his plunder as bush 
money* and of the difiierenoe between the 1^ tithe and 



Digitized by Google 



46 



MACEDONIA 



the sum actually collected, I suspect thai a very fair pro- 
portion goes into the pockets of the ofBcials. As to the 
methods of extortion, they present an infinite variety. The 
most obvious is to exaggerate the amount of the harvest. 
It must not be supposed that the tax-collector takes the 
trouble to weigh the grain or to measure it. He marches 
into the t^ranary, glances hastily round, and writes down 
the firsi esumate which occurs to him. To complain would 
be not only useless but dangerous. I once visited a village 
in Malesia (Ochrida) a few hours after the tax-collector had 
made his rounds. At the door of a fairlv prosperous house 
the women were crying and wringmg their hands. They 
led me in and showed me a heap of maize-cobs which the 
tax-collector had just estimated at an enormous figure. To 
test the matter we set children to strip the cobs, and then 
measured the grain. It was just one-htth of the estimate. 
To complete the story, when the matter came to the know- 
ledge of the Turkish officer who accompanied me in charge 
of the escort, which is forced upon every traveller, the head- 
man came hastily up and declared that everything the 
villagers had told me was a parcel of lies I He dreaded 
the vengeance of the tax-farmer, who was a powerful local 
bey. Another favourite method, when the tithe is paid in 
money, is to over-estimate not merely the amount of the 
crop, but its current market-price. At Mavrovo, for 
example, the tax-farmer adopted the simple expedient of 
declaring that the hay was worth twenty paras the oke. 
The price in the nearest market-town was actually six paras. 
The result was, of course, since he had the right to take the 
equivalent in cash of one-seventh of the hay-harvest, and 
also the right to fix the scale by which its price should be 
estimated, that the village paid more than thrice its legal 
due. He had his gendarmes behind him. There is no 
redress, and the collection is usually made with every detail 
of stupid brutality. An impost which may be just tolerable 
in a good year is ruthlessly levied when the harvest is bad. 
It is a common incident for a village to cut down its fruit 
trees to avoid the tax upon them. Nominally there are fixed 
seasons when taxes become payable, but if the exchequer 



Digitized by Googl 



VILLAGE LIFE IN MACEDONIA 47 



is empty these restrictions are soon forgotten. When I was 
in Monastir in the spring of 1903, the army contractors 
had stmckf and the municipality was obliged to find rations 
for the troops. Meantime the tax-collectors were doing 
thdr best to replenish the war chest. Taxes which are due 
in quarterly ini^ments were being gathered in advance. It 
was early summer, and the peasant^ whose corn-bin had 
long been empty, had exhausted his credit I talked with 
the headman of one little village \diere the gendarmes had 
suddenly swooped down to demand four quarters' dues in 
one lump sum. Eight peasants in this hamlet had nothing 
to pay, and asked for leave to go into the market to sell 
their lj.inbo. Leave was refused, and the peasants were 
severely beaten. Bui, indeed, the statistics of the corvee are 
a proof ill themselves of the oppressive incidence of the 
taxes. If a peasant is quite unable to pay his taxes, and if 
he has nothing which he can sell to meet them, he must 
join the gangs which are said to be repaimig the roads — 
what they actually do I could never discover, for certainly 
the roads ^how little evidence of their labour. The peasant 
dreads a journey, he leaves his village reluctantly, and 
above all he trembles at the risks involved in this forced 
toil with tlie soldier and the gendarme at his elbovv. None 
the less, I found that in one of the most prosperous villages 
near Uskub (Coutchevishta), out of a male population of 
560 no less than 370 men had been obliged last year to 
work off their obligations to the tax-collectors by joining 
the conre. 

Where the tax-collector reaps, the Albanian gleans. The 
gendarmerie, whicii itself is largely composed of brigands 
out of work, finds it prudent as a rule to make terms with any 
notable robber. A wise village will take the same course. 
For a certain sum paid annually an Albanian chief will 
undertake to protect a tributary village, or if the village is 
outside the Albanian sphere of influence, it is generally 
obliged to have its own resident brigands, who may or may 
not be Albanians. If the village belongs to a Turldsh land- 
lordy these men are generally chosen from among his re« 
tainers. They are known under the name of bckchi, or 



Digitized by Google 



4» MACEDONlxl 

nml guards. Th«y are noewary becatue the Chriitian 
population is absolutely unarmed and defenoeksa* To a 
certain extent they guarantee the village against robbers 
from outside^ and in return they carry on a licensed and 
modified robbery of their own* They support the Turfctsh 
landowner a^unat his Christian seiis; and in a ncitxed 
village they back the Moslem villagers in any roguery or 
viol^ce which they may wish to practise oi^ their Chriattan 
neighbours. There are of course honourable men among 
them^ who retain the old Albanian traditions of loyalty and 
chivalry. But, in general, their conduct is what tiie conduct 
of armed men among an unarmed subject race » will ahviiys 
be. The rural guard exacts a substantial ransom in cash 
for his services. For a consideration he will often under- 
take to compel a reluctant f<Ltlicr to give his daughter to an 
unwelcome suitor. He levies certain traditional dues — c,g»f 
blackmail upon every maid who marries. The sum varies 
with the ability of her father and her husband to pay, and 
in default ot payment the hehchi will exercise the jiis prima 
noctis. Indeed, an experienced consul in Monastir, an able 
man who had studied the country for many years, declared 
roundly that these men simply treat the women of the 
village as their harem. Beyond Uiis they take what they 
desire in food or in services. In cash their exactions vary 
with their reputation for ferocity. It is quite easv to have 
precise information. The village of Mavrovo, for example, 
had seven of these parasites. They received from 17 to 
^20 apiece. In other words, the average household with 
its annual net income of £10 paid away about £1 los. to 
purchase the good-will of these domestic marauders. 

There are considerable local differences amoni:^ Mace* 
donian villages, and the chief factor in measuring their 
happiness is tlie character of their neighbours. A village 
in an isolated position, or in a district wholly peopled by 

< In the districts where the Bolgarian Committee is active moit a£ 

the villa}*es have, in fact, acquired a certain numl:)er of rifles. But these 
must he kept buried. They arc for use wlu n the hour of insurrection 
couics, and they cannot be worn or cii&piaycd or used to prevent or to 
resent a personal injury. It is really more ilaogeroos'for a Christiaa 
to have a rifle than to be vitbovt one. 



Digitized by Google 




Google 



VILLAGE LIFE IN MACEDONIA 49 



Christiansi may enjoy comparative flecurity^ and raise itself 
im<kr iavoarable conditions to a certain rude affluence. 
The proximity of a village where the l^irks are fohatical at 
once depresses its whole standard of living. The worst 
case of all is that of the Slavonic population, \Mth borders 
on the Albanian country-— from Old Servia in the north 
down' to the glens of Kitchevo and Ocfariday which are 
ei^osed to the continual raiding of the clansmen of Dibra. 
In some of these valleys the Albanian invasion is an annual 
event, in others it is chronic. Cattle are lifted, crops of 
corn or hay are carried away before they can be garnered. 
There are seasons when it is impossible to cut wood on the 
hillside, or, indeed, to venture outside the precincts of the 
village. There are four villages in an abandoned glen to 
the west of Kitchevo which reckon on four or five visitations 
every year. In 1903 they were looted and burned to the 
ground, but ;is the Albanians during the license of the 
iiiijurrection went further aiieltl and landed alter wards m 
richer districts, we iound tiiese villages fairly contented. 
As they had had their customary punish tnent early in the 
seastjn and got it over quickly, they considered that on the 
whole they had passed a nice quiet year. Perhaps the worst 
scourge of these regions is the Albanian pastime of kid- 
napping^, to which the tribes of Dibra are specially addicted. 
The method is to capture stragglers, usually a solitary lad 
or an old man who is surprised cutting wood or herding 
sheep at a distance from the village. He is carried off to 
Dibra and kept there until his ransom is paid. An enter- 
prising bey will sometimes have several of these captives at 
once in his tower. They are sometimes fettered and driven 
out at sunrise with the cattle to labour in the helds till 
evening. I knew one family in the Malesia fOchrida) region 
to which this catastrophe had happened thnce within the 
memory of a young man who cannot have beeti more than 
thirty years of age. I knew another case in which the ransom 
demanded for a young boy was a-^ much as £Tioo (about 
;f93). His family were no more than peasants, though of 
the wealthier class. Half the money was found by selling 
their floclcs and their Und| the other half was provided by 

B 



Di i tizcdby Google 



MACEDONIA 



the elder brother, who earned it by leaving his wife and 
children and wonting lor five years in Constantinople. 
Indeed^ these exactions are a constant cause ol migration, 
and the Malesia villages only maintain themselves by 
sendiiig their more enterprising members to labour in 
Austria. 

If the villages on the marches of Albania are constantly 
on tlic edge of famine and extermination, ttic southern 
country of the Monastir vilayet (province) id relatively 
prosperous. Their Albanian neighbours belong to the 
milder Tosk race. There are few estates (Jcln/Uks), and 
most of the villages own their own lands. But ai^^ri culture 
is comparativelv unimportant. The peasantry has abandoned 
the struggle with the tax-collector and with nature, and 
lives by migratory labour. Each village has its own 
characteristic trade. One goes to work in market-gardens 
near Constantinople, and hawks their produce. Others 
have a monopoly of what we would call the dairy business, 
and grow rich by selling kaimak (a sort of sweet junket). 
A third has a reputation for its carpenters, and a fourth for 
its masons, and these wander all over the Levant, building 
wherever there is a demand. One little village has a tradi- 
tional connection with the building trade of Alliens, and 
nearly half of its families own houses in the Greek capital, 
which they have built with their own hands, and from 
which they draw a comfortable rent. Other districts prefer 
to work in Bulgaria or in Rou mania. The less thrifty are 
content with an absence of a year or two, at the end of 
which they return with savings that range from to ;f 30 
— an appreciable capital in this primitive country. The richest 
village that i came across, Smerdesh, now a mere heap ol 
charred ruins, boasted that it reached this pre-eminence 
because its young men are enterprising enough to spend as 
much as seven continuous years abroad, at the end of which 
they will return with no less than £200 or £y»o in hand. 
The result is that these villages bear little resemblance to 
the miserable agricultural hamlets of the country round 
Ochrida or Uskub. The houses are large and comparatively 
well built Each village boasts a thriving school and three 



Digitized by Google 



[ — 



VILLAGE UPE IN MACEDONIA 51 

or four shops, while their churches are large and ahnost 
ostentatious. These communities form an interesting ex* 
oeption to the general poverty, but it is none the less an 
exception which proves that the only way to thrive in 
Macedonia is to leave it. 

The importance of migratory labour in Macedonia is an 
essentially unhealthy symptom* It is sparsely peopled, and 
much of its surface lies waste and derelict, abandoned to 
undratned marshes. It is only because the current of its 
economic life is stagnant that the enterprising peasant is 
driven to work beyond its fttmtier. But, despite this signifi* 
cant phenomenon, its main business is agriculture, and the 
conditions under which it is carried on, and more especially 
the system of land tenure, are of the first unportance for the 
happiness of its peoples. 

More grievous even than the exactions of the tax-collector 
and the vexations of the rural guard is the relation of abject 
dependence in which the peasant often stands to his laiid- 
lord. The system of land tenure varies a good deal in 
Macedonia. There are some fortunate and rehitively pros* 
perous villages where the peasants own thmr fields and 
dwell in a compact mass in a purely Christian village. At 
the other extreme there are viUages where the men are mere 
day-labourers. Occasionally the landlord is a Christian, 
but when he is a Greek qteculator residing in town I doubt 
vrfaetfaer he allows mudi sympathy or fellow-feeling to enter 
into his dealings with his Slavonic peasants. The majority 
of the villages of Macedonia belong to a Turkish bey, who 
works his field on a system of niHayage, or profit-sharing. 
The land and the coU^iges belong:; to the hey^ who supplies 
seed and sometimes provide^ :-;Llt and pctrolLiiin, besides 
allowing the peasants to cut wood. Tlic pc:i^~:i.nt iiads the 
labour, the plough, and the draught aiiiiiiaU, and besides 
working on the iields, he is liable to considerable demands 
in the shape of unpaid labour on the bey's private farm and 
in his mill, besides hewing wood for him and transp' jrtiiii:^ 
his produce j^n?/;s to market. He pays no rent in money, 
hut >hares the produce of the fields. The bey receives a 
clear half of the harvest ; the peasant keeps the other half, 



Digitized by Google 



5% MACEDONIA 

but pays Us share of the tithe. The same system obtains 
more or less in some parts ol Greece, but there the hmdlonl 
is content with ooe-fliird of the harvest, and there is no 
tithe. Rou^ty speaking, the average peasant booaehold 
produces about ;^35 per annunu (5 this £^ xos. goes to 
the tax-collector and £i loa to the rural giard, otherwise 
the resident lirigand ; £io (and an unspecified amount of 
bbour into the bargain) goes to the Turkish b^, while £io 
remains for the peasant A completer system of spoliation 
and exploitation it would be hard to imagine. 

It would be easy to draw an exa^erated moral from 
such a typical budget as this. There is in some regions of 
Macedonia a degree of poverty that is abject and grinding. 
The Albanian marches live beneath a constant threat of 
famine, and there are miserable villages elsewhere which 
know the debasing fear that the daily bread will not suffice 
lor bare subsistence. But on the whole, the grievance of the 
peasantry is that they labour for masters who acknowledge 
no duties in return for the privileges they enjoy. It is 
the proportion tietween rent and income between taxation 
and earnings, that is wrong. For when all is said money 
goes so far in Turkey that an average family can somehow 
contrive to live upon the poor residuum of £io that is 
left to it from the £2^ which it earns. On this primitive 
level the bounty of nature is more important than the 
greed of the conqueror. The peasants are inured to 
hardship. The weaklings are weeded out by cold and 
coarse food and epidemic disease.' The endurance of 
those who survive almost passes belief. I well rememt)er a 
sharp December morning i»hen I stood, warmly clad in a 
thick overcoat, shivering in the intense frost and the biting 
wind, in an upland Albanian village near Ochrida. I could 
scarcely believe m) eyes when I became aware of a little 
girl of seven or eight standing laughing in front of me, 
barefoot, Inreheaded, and literally naked, save that a 

■ Smallpox, hapfnty in a mild form, is rarely absent. Typhus and 

diphtheria .ire common. Consumption is much dreaded, while tumours, 
cancer, and bone-diseases work trigliful havoc. There are virtually no 
hospitals and f«w oompctient doctm 



Digitized by Google 




Digitized by Google 



VILLAGE LIFE IN MACEDONIA 53 



lcx)8e jadcet covert ber bade. She was not a poor man's 
child. She turned oat to be the daughter of the headman 
m who9e house I had passed the nights hospitable old 
maiaader who had grown rich on the proceeds of his raids. 
It is true that to our thinking the peasantry are often poorly 
cbdy but I am not convinced that this is really felt to be 
a hardship. It is true that they have no money» but on the 
other hand they have no artificial wants. Their material life 
is m all essentials that which their ancestors led a thousand 
years ago. From the civilised world they ask only Russian 
petroleum,' the cheapest of German cutlery, English sewing 
cotton and coarse calico, cigarette papers from France, 
Austrian sugar, and coffee from Asia. All else the village 
makes for itself. The staple food i:^ bread inadc from a 
mixture of wheat with rye or maize — the tiour coarsely 
ground by water-power by the local millers. Meat the 
peasant seldom touches, except on the greater ftast diiys, 
nor does he inukc much use of milk foods. His t ivourite 
relishes arc red peppers, garHc, onions, and haricot beans, 
and with Ihe :iid of these he is content to subsist on a 
monotonous diet oi bread. It is tht; cheapest food whieh 
one cordd well imagine. For clothing, both men and women 
rely on the maL^nificent homespun cloth, made from the 
wool of their own sheep, carded, spun, and woven with 
primitive wooden instruments made in the viJage itself. 
A costume Will last for h:i\i a litclmie, and in some districts 
the women's garments arc embroidered with singular taste 
and skill from traditional designs. Each vdlage has its own 
unvarying fashion, and there is little room for diversity 
either in tin ility or kind. Every detail of life is regulated 
by customs which have probably varied only in mnmli^ 

* I half suspect tiiat the petroleum is imported for the sake of the 

square tin boxes in which it is packed. The whole domestic economy 
of Turkey seems to depeiKl upon these tins. Filed one upon another 
mod roofed with boards and aacking, they serve for slam dwellings in 
the towns. Cut up into plates tin v protect the ddcs of the better 
houses from the weather. They are used as water-cans and kitchen 
pots. Your food, your water, and even your bread, taste of petroleum, 
which becomes tio the fastidious traveller a sensuous symbol of the 
East. Nothing oould iOnstrate belter the poverty and stovealiiiess of 
Oriental life. 



Digitized by Google 



54 



MACEDONIA 



siaGe tiie first Slavs settled in Macedonia. Generation alter 
generation the women sew their ^nnents in the same 
pattern ; the potter kneads his day at the wheel into the 
same gnioehil shapes, and the gipsy smith hammers out 
the same spades, the same bridles, the same pruning hooks 
and sickles. For feast days there is a crude red wine, and 
for daily use a white brandy {rM, mastic, or onto), 
made from the skins and twigs of the g]rapes» ^ch Sunday 
the young folk gather round the same tree in the centre of 
the village and dance the same dreary and monotonous step 
in one long file to the same tuneless music of the flute, and 
the same unvarying rhythm- of the drum. The calendar, 
with its endless feasts and holydays, its long fasts and its 
appointed abstinences, gives all the variety which the 
peasants crave. It is a simple life^ laborious and limited, 
but not without its homely joys and its rude luxuries. It 
asks nothing from the outer world. It is untroubled by 
the march of artifice and progress. It might be happy in 
its simple materialism were it not for the incessant menace 
of violence and fraud. 

The suffering that follows an insurrection occurs but 
sddom. Even the tax-gatherer makes infrequent visits. 
The Albanian raids have their periods and limits. The 
one element of disturbance which is constant and intoler* 
able is that of the Moslem neighbour and the Moslem 
landlord. It is serious that out of its income of £2^ 
the typical peasant family should be compelled to pay 
some ;£i5 to landlord, tax-gatherer, and rural guard. But 
unfortunately when the relations between the peasant and 
his Turkish landlord have been set out in this precise 
fashion in black and white, only half the truth has been 
told. There are no written contracts, no leases, no custom 
which a court would enforce. If the landlord and the 
peasant were of the same race and the same creed, if they 
recognised a common moral law, and felt an ordinary 
human sympathy in their daily dealing if there were a 
police to render violence dangerous and law courts to mdce 
chicanery risky, this vague relationship would still subject 
the peasant to an intolerable economic tyranny. He is a 



Digitized by 



VILLAGE UFE IN MACEDONIA 55 



tenant at will ; he works by the grace of his master ; there 
are no industiial towns to which he can carry his labour if 
he should be harshly treated. In point of i&ct, he is the 
senrant of an alien conqueror, who barely recognises their 
eommon humanity.' There are no courts to which he can 
appeal, for he cannot afiFord to bribe ; and no Turkish judge 
would ever dare to decide in favour of a Christian peasant 
against a Moslem landlord. The village policeman (if the 
bfikeki deserves that name) is the bey's retainer and nominee. 
The sole law which regulates these complicated and elastic 
relations is the big revolver which the landlord wears in 
his belt 

What in practice is this relation ? It must vary, of 
course, from village to village, but the ruling factor is 
always force. To begin with, few Moslem landlords possess 
title-deeds. They are simply "squatters," whose fathers 
have annexed their estates as a sequel to some local 
massacre. Many cases of the kind have happened within 
living memory. I visited one village (Treska), only two 
hours' ride from Uskub, which was a populous Christian 
community fifty years ago, where tluj peasants owned their 
own land. About the time when we were " putting^ our 
money on the wroii^ horse" in the Crimea, >,on\c ciitui- 
prising Albanians swooped down on the place, m;i^-.u red 
one-half ot the population, settled iii their coitages, and 
aniiexed tlie huids of the aui vivors. The men of the present 
generation hew wood and draw water for the son of the 
brigand of the fifties, who is now a notable magnate. lie 
allows theni one-half of the proceeds of their labour on the 
lands that were tlieir fathers'. The peasants are serfs with- 
out leisure, security, or rights, l lieie are, loughly, about 
eighty days in the year when no good liulgarian will do 
mucfi work in his tields — Sundays and the greater saints' 
days. The Bey of Trc:>ka has hit on the ingenious plaa uf 

* There are, of course, exceptions. I have known three Albanian 
beys of wkiom even their own Bulgarian peasants spoke well. One 
even housed and fed bis peasants for some months aJfter their village 
had been burned during the insurrectkm by the T&rkish tmps. I 
must add that this case was unique. 



Digitized by Google 



\ 



56 MACEDONIA 

forcing his peasants to work lor htm in his private fields on 
every one of the4e eighty days. For this work he pays no 
wages in money or kind| and no share of the prodaoe is 
allotted to the labourer. The village policeman is the befs 
retainer. Half the population of the village is now Moslem. 
It is exempt from this canfie^ and naturally it is ready to use 
its arms to keep its unarmed Christian neighbours in subjec* 
tion. Before I left this village^ where there is no Sunday in 
the daily round of fruitless toil, I came on a vi^d little 
illustration of the manner of life whidi its inhabitants lead. 
An old man, sturdily built, but clothed in rags and with the 
air of the driven beast, which all these peasants wear until 
they are given a rifle and join an insurgent band, came up 
to me as I was leaving the place. Thinking tiiat I might 
have some medical skill, he bared his arm and showed me a 
nasty wound that had begun to fester. And then, with two 
neighbours to corroborate his tale, he told me how he had 
come by it He was working two days before in his field, 
when a Turk in the next field summoned him peremptorily 
to come and help him. The Bulgarian could not well leave 
what he was at for the moment, and offered to come in five 
minutes. The Turk, incensed at this display of indepen- 
dence, rushed at him and stabbed him with his knife. That 
morning the Bulgarian had started to tramp into Uskub to 
have the unhealthy wound dressed. The Turk had met him 
in the road, and driven him back. I offered to take htm to 
town with me, but he dared not come — I could not 
guarantee him against the subsequent vengeance of his 
enemy. The man's story was undoubtedly true — when a 
Bulgarian peasant lies, he does not tell dull tales like this. 
Here, then, was a little specimen of the daily life of Treska. 
I do not suppose the bey and his retainers are often obliged 
to use their knives. The knowledge that they can do so 
whenever they choose^ without risk of punishment, or 
vengeance, is probably enough to make their mastery 
respected. Once in a while it may be necessary to beat, 
or wound, or murder, and then the old round of trivial 
malice, petty robbery, and vulgar lust runs its smooth 
course once more. The consuls hear nothing of these little 



Digitized by Google 



VILLAGE LIFE IN MACEDONIA 57 



village tngtdiM—the stolsn slieepskni coat, the hamstnmg 
ox, ahady tree cat down, the mterooune diverted, the 
ivile inaulledy and it may be violated while the husband ia 
in the field. They go on unmarked from day to day, and it 
ia only when one aita down at leisttte in a peasant hut, and 
overoomea the ahynesa and suspicions o£ the owner, that 
one bears of them at all. They are neither interesting nor 
aensational, but it is this daily domestic oppression, much 
more than the startling and wholesale outrages, that has 
ground down the peasantry of Macedonia, crushed its spirit, 
its intelligence, its humanity, and made it what it is to-day—* 
a maddened race of slaves, which is ready at length to com- 
mit any crime, to suffer any torture, if only it may be rid of 
the little tyrants of its fields, who eat its bread, consume its 
labour, and'destroy its soul. 

The Macedonian problem is desperate mainly because it 
has been overlaid with abstractions. We talk of "trouble 
in the Balkans," of insurgent excesses, and Turkish atrocir 
ties, without realising that these occasional and startling 
phenomena are the product of a misery that is as constant 
as it is uninteresting — and unbearable. We think of Turkish 
misrule as an isolated and irrational fact, without compre- 
hending that it is a highly organised and quite intelligent 
system, designed to promote the profit of a small minority 
officials, tax-farmers, and landlords. It rests on a sub- 
stantial basis of corrupt and anti-social interest. The 
political mismanagement is the least of all the evils it pro- 
duces. The reality behind the whole muddle of racial 
conflicts, beyond the Chauvinism of the Balkan peoples 
and the calculations of the greater Powers, is the unregarded 
figure of the Macedonian peasant, harried, exploited, en- 
slaved, careless of national programmes, and anxious only 
for a day when he may keep his warm sheepskin coat upon 
his back, give his daughter in marriage without dishonour, 
and eat in peace the bread of his own unceasing labour. 
All our efforts might i'.ul to bestow upon luin an kIc.lI 
government. But politics u e, after all, a iirtc fraction of 
life. While Scrvui cLirns the contempt of tiic civilised world, 
the Servian pc«u>ant buwb m hope and leaps m peace, 



Digitized by Google 



5« MACEDONIA 

keeping for winter evenings the tale of murdered forbears, 
and ravished ancestors. While Bulgaria exiles her Prince^ 
and her capital seethes with the disquieting warfare of 
parties, her peasantry is for ever bringing fresh fields 
beneatii the plou^, rid of the fears which used to paralyse 
its energy and enslave its spirit The mere business of 
government, the struggles, the intrigues, the reforms which 
engage Parliaments and excite the press, count for little 
in the tranquil round of the villager's existence. It is 
the domestic tyranny of an alien dominion that affects 
htm. To rid him of this daily obsession will be the real 
emancipation. 



Digitized by Google 



I 



CHAPTER III 

THB ORTH(H>OX CHURCH 

npHERE 18 at a tncmth of a wild glen in Northern 
^ Macedonia a little village which shelters beneath its 
thatched roofs and dilapidated walls more misery and more 
tenacity than we could meet with anywhere in modern 
Europe, The peasants are mere serfs, who work on their 
master's land at their master's caprice for seven days in 
every week. They are not in the fortunate case (rf Uiose 
Christian villagers who form within the limits of the htU or 
valley that is their daily world, a compact and kindly 
community of one faith and one race. The bey's house 
dominates thdr hovels. The be/s Moslem retainers, idle, 
well armed, and bred up in a predatory tradition, live among 
them and upon them. Their existence is a monotonous 
round of exploitation and servitude, broken and varied only 
by some wanton act of malice or of mischief, for which 
there is no possibility either of revenge or of redress. Talking 
with these villagers, I remember that the question came to 
my lips, " Why do you stay ? Why do you not emigrate in 
a body ? You have no lands to lose. The railway is barely 
ten miles away. You can almost see the Servian hills, and 
to Bulgaria is only three days' tramp. Why do you not go 
to a land where you might be both prosperous and free ?" 
The answer gave me the clue to the deepest instinct in the 
Balkan peasant's nature. "Who," they said, " would care 
lor the monastery, if we abandoned it ? The Turks would 
sL'izL' it/' And then they took me to visit the " monastery." 
It \vu^ only a little chapel with a few rude outbuildings. 
Once Uicic had been a monk or two, but now a peasant 



Digitized by Google 



1 



6o MACEDONIA 

family vas in charge, fanned the poor lands that 
belonged to it in the rugged, annleas valley. It txttsted no 
architectoral beauty, no rich dkmSf no curious carving. 
But its shdl of undressed stone, daubed though it was with 
recent plaster, had echoed for centuries the prayers, the 
faith, and the misery of that abandoned hamlet Its rude 
inscriptions in Slavonic lettering proved that it dated from 
t>efore the Conquest. It was the one link with tiie past, 
and the village was ready to endure its daily humiliation, 
its incessant toil, its hopele^ poverty, content to fulfil 
the simple duty of preserving those historic stones from 
ruin, and keeping alight the little flames that had blackened 
its altar-screen with the piety of the ages. This passion for 
the church represented the one ideal element in the life of 
the village, its sole care that went beyond food and rai* 
ment, and it was strong enough to outweigh all the allure- 
ment of freedom and of ease. The more one learned of 
the Macedonian peasants, the more one realised that the 
sentiment of this village was common to them all. Going 
about among the devastated villages of Monastir after the 
insurrection, I was always led first of all to inspect the 
burned or looted church. Its destruction affected the 
people far more profoundly than the loss of their homes. 
Village after village besought us to set aside for the recon- 
struction of the churches some part at least of the relief 
money which we were spending to meet sheer starvation. 
I am convinced that the average peasant would rather that 
we had rebuilt his church, even at the cost of surrendering 
some of the food and clothing which we actually gave him. 
There is scarcely a village so poor or so small as to have no 
churcli, LVt n if the pca^:lnts themselves live in hovels of 
mud and subsist for some weeks before harvest on a diet of 
roots and herbs ; while the wealthier villages of the south 
erect spiciiuiJ, li Uwdi y, lanes which dominate the country- 
side.' 

* The older cfawdiet in the East we indeed little more fliaa sbrinei. 

They have little relation to population. You may find them in desert 

Elacc^ or. again, a town of perhaps 5,000 inhabitants will hoast one 
uadt cd iUicicot chapeb. They are not places of <ii»^«mbly 01 worship. 



Digitized by Google 



I 
I 




AN'CIENT CHURCH OK ST. SOPHIA (OCHRIDA), NOW A DILAFIDAIEI) 

MOSyUK 



Digitized by Google 



THE ORTHODOX CHURCH 



6i 



It is not so much the religious instincts of the Balkan 
peasant as his political conditions which explain his 
passionate attachment to his Church and the great part 
which it plays in his existence. His fidelity to his Church 
has been through five centuries one continuous martyrdom. 
He has remained true to it not merely from a reasoned or 
traditional faith in its tenets, but rather because apostasy 
involved a foreswearing of his nationaUty and a treason to 
the cause of his own race. It is the only free and com- 
munal life which the Turks permit him. It is essentially 
a' national organisation. It reminds him of the greater 
past. It unites him to his fellow-Chi istians throughout the 
Empire, and in the free lands beyond the Empire. It is 
the one form of association and combination which is not 
treasonable. Its Bishops ;ire the sole Chn-^tuLti aristocracy 
in Turkey, its synods .md ils locdl councils tlic only form of 
autonomy or reprci>cntativc sclf-guvcrnnicnt which the law 
allows. Any political organisation ouUi lc the Church must 
necessarily be ;i ^ccrci anci proscribed suciuly. Within the 
Church uid Ihc various activities, mainly schuhistic, which 
grow up aruund a Church, a certain measure of freedom is 
possible. The resuh i-> that the Christians of Turkey have 
always pieoci ved and sLiil possess a cei taia uiuly and power 

Thfij m nflMr monuments to some wint There is room to iwing a 
censer and chant an Alleluia, but for a congregation no one thought of 
providuig. Pictttr^ {eUums) coauuemoratc the dead saint, and perhaps 



and quaint domes of antique brick, fulhls a duty for tiTe countryside by 
its mt re cxistt ncc, and doubtless counts for much in winning the 
favours ul liic giuniied maityr or hermit. The mocicra churches, which 
ave often large andspacioof, are obviously built under the influence of 
a quite different conception of tfie Church's place in hfe. They have of 
course their altars and their akoiis, but thev are primarily " synagogues " 
■^^-•sseinbly-rooiiu. The village mider tWkisn role, has cometo vakie 
its Church as the centre of its social and political existence. Here alone 
it is permissible for the commune to feather torrctlicr Here it is free 
from the eye^ of the tyrant and the uiibciicvci . MccUngs to discuss 
sea^btf interests are somctiiiifls held in the nave, and the Insurgent 
Committee will summon a village to church in order to choose the 
men who are to serve in Us bands. But, despite these profane uses, the 
Chwch retains its sanctity. Sometimes, uiough rarely, it was used 
during the winter of 1903-4 as a refuge by houseless families, but my 
suggestions that it shonhl be turned into ho«;p!tal during an epidemic 
t&cited iiorror — ior a dc;ith would iuve lucunt dc^ccraUun. 



a chest contains his relics. 




Digitized by Google 



62 



MACEDONIA 



of common action. The Church has paid the inevitable 
penalty. She has been more or less secularised and her 
spiritual functions have suffered. Her mission has been 
patriotic rather than spiritual. 

This transformation of the Orthodox Church into a 
national organisation was a consequence of the peculiar 
civilisation of its conquerors. The Turks were a military 
people with a theocratic organisation. Their law was a 
religious code ; their army a force which conquered in the 
name of a faith. Of civil law and civil culiinnistration they 
had no conception, and these ideas h;ivc hardly taken root 
even in our own time. The- law whicli they brought with 
them war^ the Koran, and it was no mure possible to impose 
it upoti Christians tlian it was to include them in the army. 
Aful accordm ^ly there grew up a curious system of autoiiumy 
Within tile Empire which had no territorial or racial basis, 
but rested wliolly on religion. The Turkish courts, which 
existed only for the interpretation of the Koran, had iuris- 
diction only over Moslems. Disputes among Christians 
were left to the Christian Church for settlement, and the 
heads of the Church were made responsible to the Ottoman 
officials for the good govcnunent of their flocks. Society 
was organised in Churches, to one or other of which every 
Ottoman subject must belong. These Millds, as they are 
called — Islam, the Greek Church (Roum), the Cathohcs, 
the Armenians, and the Jews — were the only subdivibions 
which the Turks recognised. The Roum Millet (Koum is 
a Turkish corruption of Romaios, the Greek name for a 
subject of Byzantium) was all that remained of the Eastern 
Empire. Under Bishops and Patriarchs it carried on the 
life of the Byzantine court, and preserved the Greek 
nationality with the Greek form of Christianity. It was a 
name which confounded Serbs, Bulgars, and Greeks under 
one common designation which implied only a recognition 
of the authority of the Patriarch of Constantinople. The 
system lasted everywhere in its entirety until well into 
the last century. There are still towns in Albania {e.g., Ipek) 
where there are as yet no civil courts and the Koran is the 
only law. But although a code based on the Napoleonic 



Digitized by Googl 



THE ORTHODOX CHURCH ^3 



model now prevails in all but the wilder corners of Turkey, 
the old theocratic arrangement is by no means extinct. The 
law of marriage, divorce, and inheritance is still administered 
by the Bishops. It was, moreover, only the Sultan's Reform 
Scheme of 1902 which abolished the plan by which each of 
the religious communities of the chief towns dected a lay 
member to sit as judge in the various civil courts. For 
purposes of registration and for passports the old 
system of Millets is still in vogue, and Serbs, Vlachs, Ortho- 
dox Albanians, and Bulgarians, who have not joined the 
schismatic national Church, are still classified in the census 
under the comprehensive title Roum — a fact of which the 
Greeks, eager to make out a claim to Macedonia, are never 
slow to take advantage. 

It is one of those odd anomalies against which one is for 
ever stumbling in Turkey, that the Bishops of the Orthodox 
QiinrGh enjoy, in name at least and by right, an authority 
and a rank which Churchmen in any Christian country 
rarely possess, unless by reason of their personal character* 
The old-fashioned Turk seldom brings himself to regard a 
Christian as anything better than an unclean and perverted 
animal. The o£Bcial documents which confer authority 
upon Bishops and Patriarchs are based upon an ancient 
model which denounces all Christianity as a corrupt in- 
vention of the Evil One. The Sultan may order a 
systematic massacre of the Bishop's flock, to be carried 
out under the control of his officers at the signal of 
trumpets sounded from minarets. But none the less the 
Bishop is a high officer of state. He may rank in the 
official hierarchy above the civil and military governors ol 
the town in which he resides. He may, if he chooses, 
daim the authority, the precedence, and the dignity which 
that rank confers. He has a place in the advisory council 
of his district. It happened that the Caimakam (prefect) of 
Castoria was dismissed in the autumn of 1903 because he 
had fallen too palpably and too publicly under the influence 
of the Greek Archbishop. It was a useless precaution. 
The next Caimakam, being a person of no particular 
character and of very limited intelligence, fell promptly 



Digitized by Google 



64 MACEDONIA 

under the same aeoendancy. A clever ecclesiastic, if he has 
a quick wit and a deep purser and above all if he has the 
courage to uBe his positioni may come to exercise a very 
real influence upon the administration* The Caimakanu^ 
and even the Valis (Govemora), rarely keep their posts for 
very loQg and seldom acquire much local influence. They 
come to look upon the bribes which the Bishops pay them 
as among their most secure and reliable sources o£ income^ 
with the result that a knowledge of Turkish is more valued 
in a Bishop than a deep acquaintance with New Testament 
Greek. It is of little moment thai he should be a theo- 
logiaui but highly important that he should be a man of the 
world. And yet among the nine Macedonian Bishops I have 
known, not more than three used their power to much effect 
The Bishops^ though chosen exclusively from the celibate 
dergy ^o have had a long professional training, often find 
it hard to forget their peasant origMi ; and the dread of the 
ruling race that is ingrained in every Macedonian villager is 
apt to cling to them through life. In any event the powers 
of the local Turkish officials are so limited under modem 
conditions that the influence of the Bishops can only be 
brought to bear upon trivial and parochial details. And if 
the Bishop has some power, he also beara a very grievous 
responsibility. If the Turks happen to be in the state of 
mind when they wish that the people had only one head 
that they might cut it off, the Bishop offera a very tempt- 
ing substitute. Of late years the influence of Russia has 
strengthened the position of the Bishops. The classical 
instance of this tendency to make the Bishops responsible 
for the sins of their flock is the case of the Greek Patriarch 
who was hanged during the War of Independence. The 
recent annals ol Armenia would supply other parallels. 
This sort of thing naturally tends to make the average 
Bishop, who ought to be a sort of tribune of a people, a 
shifty and timid representative of official religion who serves 
two mastera with an anxious neck. 

But among his own people it would be difficult to 
exaggerate the influence of the Bishop. In the common 
speech of the Gred» he is known as the Despdtes. He 



Digitized by Google 



THE ORTHODOX CHURCH 65 



represents among them at once the civil and the religious 

power, and he is the nearest approach that they possess to 
a native aristocracy. He is their sole mediator with the 
Turks — ^unless there are European consuls at hand. He 
guides all the machinery of the Church, including its 
truncated civil functions (marriage, inheritance, divorce). 
He controls the schools, and, if such a thing exists, the 
hospital of the community. He is, by peasant standards, 
fabulously wealthy. He maintains a certain state, and 
usually inhabits a great house on a commanding site. 
His advice is sought on large issues and on small. He 
keeps his distance, bears himself as a rule with a dignity 
which is partly aristocratic and partly sacerdotal. Etiquette 
surrounds him with rcvcTciit. phrases of By/.;iiitine origin, 
and usage prescribes that the faithful who enter his presence 
shall bow profoundly, kiss his hand, and seat themselves at 
some distance from lus chair. But he is part ot an old 
order which is rapidly disappeaim^ before Western influ- 
ence. Among the older generation of Bishops, \vhiie a 
certain practical wisdom and knowledge of tlie world i6 no 
rare quality, education hi any European sense of the word 
is rare. There are, however, two Macedonian Bishops, both 
Greeks, who have studied abroad, one in Oxford and one in 
Leipzig, but their knowledge of English and German only 
throw into deeper relief their incorrigibly Byzantine habits 
of thought. Many of the higher Bulgarian clergy have 
studied in Russia, but only m the clerical seminaries, from 
which, I imagine, modern and Western ideas are very 
jealously excluded. They lead for the most part a sedentary 
life, rarely venturing beyond their palaces or coming into 
touch with the daily life of the peasantry. Their pre- 
occupation is the incessant round of intrigue and violence 
by which each Church in Macedonia retains its place 
ai^:iinst its rivals. Their trade is intolerance and their 
business propaganda, and it leaves them little leisure to 
concern themselves with the spiritual or material welfare 
of their hoc ks. At^'iinst some, rumour tells tales of avarice 
and corruption, notably in the sale of divorces. Others are 
celibates only in their vows. The most favourable type 
9 



Digitized by Google 



66 



MACXX)ONIA 



among them whom I have known was the Bulgarian Metro- 
politan Gregorius of Monastir, a gentle old man with no 
taste less innocent than the culture of flowers. In his early 
manhood he organised an ambulance during the Russo- 
Turkish War, and, despite all the opposition of Turks and 
Greeks, he spent some weeks of the winter which followed 
the insurrection in going about among the devastated 
villages to relieve their distress. 

The importance of the Bishops is destined to disappear 
with Turkish authority and the theocratic tradition which it 
acclimatised in Eastern Europe. Already the Bulgarian 
Committee represents a movement of democratic revolt 
against these princes of the Church. It is a movement led 
by young and half-Westernised men who find themselves 
nearly as much out of sympathy with Byzantinism as with 
Turkish rule. 

It is not an easy task for a foreigner to attempt to form 
an estimate of the worth and character of religion as it is 
represented by the Orthodox Church in Macedonia. One 
goring and quite objective fad, however, seems to promise 
a £airly sure inference. Nothing could be more reooarkable 
than tile total absence of heresy among the Christians of 
Turkey and the Balkan States. The active specubtion of 
the Greek mind and its preoccupation with religion pro- 
duced an endless succession of more or less interesting 
heresies even during the Middle Ages. With the Turkish 
conquest they abruptly ceased. A Patriarch who had been 
educated in Germany played a little with Protestantism in the 
seventeenth century. I t)elieve there is no other instance 
of any deviation from the monotonous path of official 
orthodoxy. There has been schism, it is truei but always 
on political and never on theological grounds. The ex- 
plaitttion lies, I am afraid, on the surfoce. There is no 
heresy in the Eastern Churdi because there is no real 
interest in religion. Turkish rule hs6 crushed every form 
of intellectual life, and in the feud of conqueror and 
conquered, Christianity has become no more than a sort 
of mental uniform in which one party has marched in a 
long and doubtful defensive warfare* The conquest did, in 



Digitized by 



THE ORTHODOX CHURCH 67 



fact, destroy a peculiarly interesting heresy > which flourished 
under the name of Bogomilism among the Slavs of Mace>- 
donia and Bosnia and also in Albania. It seems to have 
been Unitarian in its theology, Manichean in its metaphysics, 
and so stubbornly idealist, so certain that all matter and 
therefore all external forms are evil, that it rejected the sacra- 
ments. The Uttle one knows of it suggests an affinity with 
some of the most spiritual of the Russian peasant heresies. 
But the modem Balkan peasant has neither the leisure nor 
the ease of mind to approach religion with any fresh and 
original insight. And here the Christianity of the Eastern 
Church compares unfavourably with Islam, which proves 
its vitality by not a little unorthodox speculation. There is 
no movement of thought among the Christians which can 
compare in interest with the Bektashi heresy, with its secret 
revolt against Mahomet, its mystical tendencies^ and its 
preaching of tolerance and brotherhood (see pp« 246, 247). 

Indeed the Cross in the East has become so much a mere 
^mbol of warfare that it is a little difficult to define Ortho- 
dox Christianity in any but negative terms. I doubt if it 
has any important bearing on conduct, and certainly in its 
traditions there is no longer a trace of that humanitarian 
spirit of mercy and love which the modern mind tends 
more and more to read into its religion. The Moslem at 
least has a thecny that he may atone for many sins by giving 
bread to the pariah dogs of the streets,* There is no such 
sentiment as this among the Christians, and as little recog- 
nition of any duty to the poor and the sick. I shall not 
easily foiget the impression made upon me during a visit 
to Koritiap a wealthy and progressive town with a powerful 

* It wa^ connected with the Paulician heresy in Armenia and also 
with the later movements among the Albigenses and the Bohemians. 

* I suppose there are few men in history of whose cruelty chroniclers 
vOI speak more harshly than Sultan Abdul Hamid. And jpet this num 
was recently at pains to give an order forbiddin^^ the European Tram- 
way Company in Constantinople to lay salt on its lines during winter, 
lest the mizhire d salt and tnow ahonld cause pain to the feet of the 
dogs of the street. Which, to some just and eternal intelligence, would 
be the more guilty— -the ignorant and superstitious despot who 
ma^crej* disloyal subjects from fear, or the "enlightened" man ui the 
world who caasct pain to dmnb umah for gahif 



Digitized by Google 



68 



MACEDONIA 



Orthodox community whidi lavishes money on large 
schools, and a pretentious catfaedral| when the Greek 
Bishop begged me to assign a pound from the British 
Relief Fund to assist a single family of refugees which was 
starving within a stone's throw of the episcopal palace.' 
Both at Odirida and Castoria we made several vain 
attempts to induce the Bulgarian clergy to visit the sick 
and the wounded in our hospitals^ to bring them some 
spiritual consolatioUi to read aloud to them, perhaps, and 
at all events to cheer them with a kindly hmnsm word. 
But evidently ministrations of this sort do not enter into 
the Eastern ideal of Qiristianity. The only concern which 
the clergy displayed in our patients was a very keen amdety 
lest we should encourage these misetable creatures, in need 
of every attention and nourishment, to break the terribly 
severe fasts which the Church imposes for thirty days 
before Christmas as well as during Lent. I can only recol- 
lect one piece of evidence to show that the Church interests 
herself at all In conduct--the frequent presence in the 
churches of crude symbolical pictures in which the awful 
fate of various sorts ol sinners is depicted, and a choice 
assortment of the wicked, including even Bishops and 
Pashas, are enduring appropriate but always liuid tortures. 
On the other hand, it is interesting to note that the confes- 
sional, which is still nominally an institution of the Eastern 
Church, has fallen into almost total disuse. That seems to 
imply a growing indifference to conduct, but it is also, no 
doubt, a natural consequence of the ignorance and degra- 

■ Nothing could illustrate more dismally the essential barbarism of 
the Greek Church than the abominable cruelty practised in the monas- 
teries upon lunatics. There are no other asylums in Turkey, and the 
method of care consists in imprisoning the sufferer in an nnaei^^round 
dungeon, where he is more or less starved, sometimes deprived of 
water, and often beaten unmercifully to expel the evil spirit I knew 
one case where these tortures were exercised upon an old priest, who 
was suffering from nothing more serimis than the failing of menial 
power, whicn not infrequently follows a severe attack of ir.fluenza. It 
would be well if the excellent Anglican Churchmen who are trying to 
promote a union with the Eastern Church would use their influence to 
reform such abuses as these, instead of perpetuating, by their lodicroiis 
flaMcrir'^ fbe complacency which expkuna tliem. llic Turks are not 
the ouiy authors ot Eastern atrocities. 



Digitized by 



THE ORTHODOX CHURCH 69 



datioii Gi the secular clergy. To go lor ethical guidance 
to the average village priest would indeed be too ridiculous. 
The married priests outside the larger towns are for the 
most part almost totally uneducated, and lead the life of 
peasants, only adding the fees paid by then llock for 
marriages, baptisms, and funerals to the revenues of their 
fields. They can read enough to muml le through the 
niual, and write sufficiently well to keep the parish regis- 
ters ; but there their superiority to the average peasant 
ends. Preaching is practically unknown. Their function 
IS not that oi the pastor or the teacher. They are simply 
petty officials who perform the rites appropriate to the 
crossing of the frontier between this world and the next. 
They bury and baptize for a consideration, much in the 
spirit of a cust©ms' officer who takes toll on the border of 
him who enters and him who leaves. The priest is none 
the less usually among the leaders of his village. As the 
representative of the Bishop, and one of the "notables" 
whom the Turkish authorities may call to account, he exer- 
cises considerable power. We had often occasion to appeal 
to the priest of a devastated village to coiiipile a list of the 
more destitute families. The result was rarely satisfactory. 
Either he made a shameless catalogue of his own relatives 
and friends, or else, fearing to offend any of his flock, he 
wrote down all alike. The best priests were, as a rule, the 
men who had been elected by their village as insurgent 
chiefs because of some natural gift of lea Icrship. 

And yet I should convey a totally false impression if any- 
thing in this chapter were to suggest that the Macedonian 
{H iisant is defacient in the religious sense. He has it pro- 
loundly in some way not very easy to define. He fasts 
with scrupulous exactitude for no less than two hundred 
days of the ycAr, and an Orth(M:lox fast, involving, as it does, 
abstinence not merely from nie;it, but also from fish, milk, 
and eggs, is a terribly severe ordeal. In towns, and per- 
haps in the richer villages, it is not observed in all its 
rigour, but at least the women of tlie poor npland villages 
would rather perish than break it. Ceremonies play a 
great part in Macedonian life, and yet I can conceive no 



Digitized by Google 



MACEDONIA 



people more scandalously irrcvcTcnt. Certain rites, like the 
blessing of the waters on the feast of Johr: the Baptist, 
when the Bishop casts a cross int(^ tlie nearest lake or river, 
for which tiie young men dive, are frankly paj^an and 
delighlfull V picturesque. But only antiquai laa could 
find an excuse lor the ceremonial of baptism or marriage. 
The friends of the infant or of the young couple laugh and 
talk (iiiring the quaint proceedings, and 1 have heard a 
Bulg.irian priest convulse the church with a witticism 
emitted during the intervals when he was mumliUn^ incan- 
tations and smearing the purple body of the hapless baby 
with the due number of crosses in oil. But, indeed, there 
is some excuse for the peasants. Worship is conducted 
entirely in a dead language, incomprehensible to all but the 
educated. It is intelligible that the Greeks should cling to 
the ancient tongue, but when one finds that the new Bul- 
garian Church revived the old Slavonic of Saints Cyril and 
Methodius instead of creating a ritual in modern Bulgarian, 
one suspects that obscurity and remoteness must be essen- 
tial desiderata of the Oriental religious consciousness. 
What remains after all these negations is, I think, this : that 
the Macedonian peasant has a haunting sense of the con- 
stant presence of God and the saints. His daily language 
is moulded by it, and recurring sentences contain the name 
of God. In Turkish the first word that one learns is yavash 
(slowly) ; in Bulgarian it is Gospod (God). Announce that 
you have come to confer some benefit, the invariable 
response is, "God has sent you.'* Ask a village what it will 
do when the dole you have been providing ceases, and it 
will answer, " God will see to it." Mention that some one 
is ill, and you are assailed with a "Gocl will save her."* 
The God behind these phrases is, 1 suspect, simply the 

' Tilis particular phase of reiifiioas fedin^ results in a complete 
neglect of all Military cuid medioal pracaittions, partiealarly mon 

children are concerned. One Bulgarian prelate seemed always to 
enttrtain a lurking distrust of our hospital as an impious interference 
With Providence. " if God means them to get better tiicy will get 
better ; if He doesn't they won't" This typical eccteaiMHc Often 
resembled Ibsen's Pastor Manders, who hdo that instmnoe »g;*<"tt 
implied a defiance of Providence, 



Digitized by Google 

» 



THE ORTHODOX CHURCH 71 



characterless natural force of Eastern Fatalism, eiKlowed 
with no very definable moral attributes, and entLriiig into 
no very notcwortiiy (ir inumatc relalion with the human 
spirit. But the belief in His presence, iind in a glorious 
legion of saints, sometimes vioiblo and always active, and 
not very clearly distinguished from the traditional SlavQuic 
fairies, is completely sincere, and as yet untouched by 
Western influences. It is said that in some villages the 
Bulgarian peasants were only induced to join the insurrec- 
tion when a phonograph smuggled into church on the fatal 
Sabbath declared in uncanny tones that it was the voice 
of Christ who commanded all His followers to rise 
against the Turks, and assured them of victory. I cannot 
vouch for the truth of this tale, but if it be an inven- 
tion it is an apt enough satire on the Christianity of the 
Balkans. 

There is one common illusion regarding the Churches of the 
Balkans which Mr. Balfour has done much to popularise. 
He has written and spoken as though the rifts and feuds 
among Eastern Christians were the result of their religious 
differences. That is an exact inversion of the facts. It 
is true that the old feud between Greeks and Latins still 
survives, but even this had its origin not m the theological 
differences, which were more than once composed, but 
rather m the bitter memories of the Crusades, when the 
Christian chivalry of the West turned aside from the road 
that led to the Holy Sepulchre, to s ick Constantinople and 
destroy the Eastern Empire. But there are virtually no 
Catholics in European Turkey outside Albania and the 
Levantine sea-ports. The battle of the Churches is simply 
a political or more properly a racial conflict, which assumed 
an ecclesiastical colour only because of the curious theocratic 
conditions which prevail in Turkey. There is between 
the Greek and Bulgarian Churches no shadow of difference 
either in doctrine, nlual, or constitution. The only 
ditterence between them is that the Greeks "' acknowledge 
the authority of the Greek Patriarch and are inscribed in 
the ^^Roum" MUUt, while the Bulgarians reject his 



Digitized by Google 



MACEDOxNlA 



sapremacrfy obey the Bulgarian Exarch, use the Slavonic 
languagie in their services, and are enrolled in the Bolgaurtan 
if tUrf. Persecution there is in plenty, but it cannot properly 
be called religious persecution. Villages are '^converted" 
by force, by threats, or by persuasion from one Church " 
to another, but the process means no more than a trans* 
ference of allegiance from one political propaganda to its 
rival. The whole Bulgarian schism has of course been 
excommunicated by the Greek Patriarch, but tiie absurdity 
of this use of spiritual weapons in carnal warfare is so 
patent that '^Greeks" and ''Schismatics" frequently share 
the same church, and say Mass on alternate Sundays in 
Greek and Slavonic from the same altar.' 

One can understand this singular feud only by remem- 
bering that Turkish institutions render impossible the 
formation of any kind of party or combination except 
on an ecclesiastical basis. A group of men who may widi 
to create any nationalist or politiod association in Turkey 
must choose between the alternatives of founding either 
a Church or else a secret society. When the Bulgarians 
wished to emphasise the fact that they were a race separate 
from the Greeks, the only possible procedure was to make 
a schismatic Church which should give them a right to 
claim recognition as a new MiUei ; for the Greeks refused 
to recognise their language or to appoint Bulgarian Bish(^ 
The success of the Bulgarian propaganda owes more to the 
adoption of this drastic and uncompromising course than to 
anything else. The Servians have never ventured to throw o£F 
the authority of the (Ecumenical Patriarch, and tfaougfi after 
an incnediUe expenditure of backsheesh and much diplo- 
matic intrigue Uiey succeeded, in 1897, in procuring the 
nomination of a Serb as Archbishop of Uskub, they are still 
confounded with Greeks, Vlachs, and Orthodox Albanians 
in the ''Roum" MilUt. The Vlachs are in a still more 
anomalous position. They have no Church and no 
hierarchy of their own, yet the few priests who dare to say 

* Tournefort, the botanist whom Louis XIV. sent on a long cruise 
in the Levant, reports thn.t even (iro<>ks and Latins shared the same 
cliurchcb in the i;>Luid^ ul the Axciupciago. 



Digitized by Google 



THE ORTHODOX CHURCH 73 



Mass in Roumanian are promptly excommuntcated by the 
Greek Bishops. 

Bat perhaps the most curious and instructive ecclesiastical 
development in the Balkans is the organisation knom as 
the Catholic Uniate Church. Nothing bears witness so 
triumphantly to tiie hold which ''Orthodoxy" has on the 
East The Uniate Church is an invention which played 
its part in Louis Napoleon's efforts to consolidate French 
influence in the Near East (i857-'i86i). In ritual, constitu- 
tion, and even in dogma, it is practically indistinguishable 
from the Orthodox Churdi. But just as the Bulg^ffian 
Church is an Orthodox Church which recognises not the 
Patriarch but a Primate of its own, known as the Exarch, 
so the Uniate Churdi is an Orthodox Oiurcfa whidi 
recognises the Pope. The clergy marry, wear the garb of 
the Eastern priest, say Mass in Bulgarian, and in every 
external follow the Eastern rite. There seemed no other 
way of creating nominal Catholics who would be under 
French protection. The movement had some temporary 
success among the Bulgarians, but it defeated its own ends 
by frightening Russia into the creation of the Bulgarian 
Exarchate,! and when that happened its adherents deserted 
en masse. The Uniate Patriarch was kidnapped, and the 
Church has practically no following in Macedonia to-day 
except in the district of Kilkish, where its admirable 
orphanages are situated. The implied admission that 
nothing in Catholicism is essential save the authority of the 
Pope seems curiously cymciil. But tlie policy of making 
converts by a wholcbaic pulitical mcthud justifies itself in the 
second generation. The priests are ccluc:Lted and trans- 
iormed : worship is rendered reverent, and Uie children are 
trained up in a conception of religion which has nothing at all 
in common with that of the genuine Eastern Church. But 
the day of political Churches is rapidly passing even in Mace- 
donia. During the winter of 1903-4, Sarafof, disgusted by 

' This mm in 1870, in the days when Pandavism was a force in 
Russia and General Ignatieff ruled Constantinople. Rus^ia naturally 
feared that if the southern Slavs became Catholics she would lose her 
ascendancy over them. 



Digitized by Google 



74 



MACEDONIA 



fhe failure of OrfliodoK Russia to support the revolntion, gave 
the word of order that, with the object of winning the 
sympathy of the Western Powers, the Bulgarians should 
enrol themselves either in the Roman or the Protestant 
communion.' There was practically no response. 

But tiie real rdigion of the Balkans is something more 
deeply-rooted than all this fantastic confusion of political 
Churches and racial fends. It is older and more demental 
than Christianity itself; more permanent even than the 
Byzantine rite. It bridges the intervening centuries and 
links in pious succession the modern peasant to his heathen 

■ It may not be irrdevaiit to add here a note on the failure of 
Protestant inissions in the Balkans. The real root of this failure is 
doobfleM tlie simple fact that the Macedonian expects that his Church 
should have a definite I * n ational and poUtical character. A purely 
spiritual propaganda is beyond his cooa,prehension. He never quite 
arandoiis the oonvictioii that tiie American miwioiiaries mast be wotk' 
ing ill the interests of England or Ameriai (he hardly distinguishes 
between them). When he discovers that conversion carries with it 
no claiin to consular protection he feels cheated and disillusioned. A 
Chnrch on these lines has, in his view, no bait which should tempt him 
into a national apostasy. Native Protestants, moreover, have to endure 
not a little social persecution, despite the fact that tJhe missionaries 
ttiemadires are mivenally and deservedly respected. One of them 
who has just left Monastir was indeed informally canonised by local 
opinion. And yet in thirty years he hardly made as many converts. 
Evangelical Proteijtautism, as the older generation of missionaries inter- 
pret it, seems— it is merely a personal opinion-^ somewhat harsh and 
sterile creed. To the natives it appears mainly as a series of negations — 
so many prohibitions of wine, tobacco, aAon- worship, and Sunday travel' 
ling. Negations will never ath«cL Another serious drawback is the ose 
of the English language in the American schools, not merely as an acquire- 
ment, but as a vehicle of instruction. French is the languajJc which the 
educated Macedonian wishes to learn, and Enjgli^h is coni]>ajativcly use- 
less. Better results should be achieved by tiie industrial and agricottwal 
school which the Rev. E. Haskell has started near Salonica. It seems 
a pity that the Protestant missiooaries ever founded a rival Church at 
alL Had they cared to take orders in the Orthodox Church, or even to 
cooBne themselves to educational work, they might have promoted a 
reformation from within. Undoubtedly they have done great good, 
particularly in i3ulgaria and in Armenia. Their colleges and secondary 
schools were so lu-gely frequented by native Christian huts that tihe 
Eastern Churches were compelled in self-defence to imitate them. 
Mere rivalry did much to ba^en the educational development of all 
the Christian races. At least the American schools sowed discontent 
and aspiration. If they have not made Protestants they have made 
relatively well-educated men, who found the sta^uUion and O pp r essi on 
of the Turkish East completely unendurable* 



Digitized by Google 



THE ORTHODOX CHURCH 75 



ancestor, wiio wore the same costumes and led the same 
life in the same iieldb. It is based on a primitive sorrow 
before the amazing fact of death, which no mysiery of the 
Resurrection has ever softened. It is neither a rite nor 
a creed, but only that yearning love of the living for the 
dead which is deeper than any creed. The most poignant 
expression of Eastern religion for me is a Macedonian 
churchyard on All Souls' Day. Under an irrelevant cross 
stand crowds of women wailing for the dead, some with 
a conventional, an annual grief that strikes no note of 
smcerity, others with a bitter anguish that seems to mock 
the consolations of religion. One by one they place tlieir 
offerings on the tombstones — tlie same gifts of wine and 
corn that nourished the shade of an Homeric hero. It is 
true that the priest comes round to bless them, but one feels 
that he is a spiritual parvenu dragged by a force beyond 
himself mto a prehistoric ritual which survives in the heart 
of the Balkan peasants, a Paganism more native, more 
congenial, more deeply-rooted than the Orthodox Church 
itself. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV 



THE RACB8 OP MACBOONU 

TF its towns were typical of MacedODia it would indeed 
be a land of insoluble riddles and inextricable con* 
fusions* They have no character save an infinite charity 
for the obsolete of all ages, a tolerance which rejects no 
innovation and shrinks from no anachronism. One seems 
in such a place as Ochrida to move in a long pageant of 
strange and beautiful things which has no more reality than 
some symbolical procession. The straggling town is built 
on the shores of a great lake, and the white mountains that 
enclose it shut out the modern world and banish civilisation. 
The fishermen put out upon it in prehistoric boats, great 
punts with platform-poops, balanced by rudely-chiselled 
logs nailed on to their timbers at haphazard, and propelled 
by oarsmen who insist on rowing entirely from one side, 
while an old man or a boy stationed in the stern works 
hard to prevent them from revolving in a circle. The 
peasants oome and go under crumbling mediaeval g^tewajrs 
in costumes which can hardly have varied since the first 
Slavs invaded the Balkans. The men are in rough coats of 
sheepskin with the wool turned inwards. They walk slowly 
over the cobbled stones, turning their gnarled and weather- 
beaten tiioss 1o the ground, half from a habit of weariness 
and dejection, half in the effort to avoid stumbling over the 
dogs which sleep in the hollows of the pavement At their 
heels, silent and docile, trudge their women, laden with 
market produce or bending under bundles of firewood, a 
slight race which ages prematurely and clothes itself, with 
a pathetic suggestion of childhood, in a simple overall 



Digitized by 



U3 
I 



O 



Digitized by Googl 



THE RACES OF MACEDONIA 77 

which barely covers the ankles. Each village has its fashion 
of embroidering the graceful garment, and from the red 
needlework or the black you may learn all you need know 
of the wearer. She comes from this hamlet or the other. 
She has dressed herself as her mothers dressed themselves 
for generations, and her loyalty to tradition proclaims that 
she has never asked for novelty or innovation, nor rebelled 
against the conventions and the monotonies of her lot. As 
she goes, other types succeed, each as simply conservative, 
as careful of its past — it may be a Spanish Jew with his loni:^ 
grey beard and his gabardine, or a tall Albanian posturin;4 
in his white kilt with an air of defiant idleness and con- 
scious stren0h. One refuses to take them for men of 
to-day. Oik \v:ilks amony the in as one walks alon^ avLnues 
of gods and iiiuiiiniic^ iiu^oinu great museum. Thcv belong 
to tlic s:uiif a^c as the incdiifval fortress wIiilU crowns the 
hill or till graceful chapel which perpetuates the memorv 
of Byzantium. Tlie centuries jostle in a contemporary 
crowd, anci the dead past is your daily neighbour. Nor is 
it other wise ui half-moderiiised towns like Monastir, which 
a railway connects with the levelling sea and the markets 
and manufactories of Europe. The Greeks go about in 
garments that ape the fashions of London and Paris. The 
Turkir^h oificiais love to array themselves in frock-coats of 
shabby black and nondescript cut. But even the consuls 
walk abroad with a kilted Albanian at their heels, and ere 
the town begins you must make your way through the 
gipsy colony, where lithe brown men do smith work in 
cabins which resemble cobwebs rather than structures, 
and laughing women stand at the doors in semi-nakedness, 
showing their white teeth and their wild eyes that defy 
convention and ridicule fear. Civilisation is only one 
incongruous element the more in all this welter of variety. 
You will note only one common feature in tiiese crowds of 
hostile races. The men, unless they are happy enough to 
be citizens of some European State, or poor enough to 
have no fear of their masters, are all covered with the red 
fez which has come to signify, no one quite knows how, 
loyalty to the buitan and acceptance of his rule. No head- 



Digitized by Google 



7B 



MACEDONIA 



gear with a meaning can ever have covered so much 
h^^crisy and so much treason, so many internecine feuds, 
and such contradictory plots of revolt and repression.* 

There is something in the physical town which answers 
to this moral confusion. Under a briliiant sky and in 
regions where some constructive race has preceded 
the Turks, one meets with something more than the 
attraction of the bizarre. Crete, with its memorials of 
Venetian architecture, has a beauty to show which one 
encounters nowhere in Macedonia. But there is none the 
less a charm in these houses of all periods, sinking into a 
kindly decay in supreme unconsciousness of their pictures- 
queness. There is nowhere a hint of pretension, nor a 
suggestion that a man will be judged l>y the spruceness 
of the house he inhabits. Woodwork is left unpainted to 
rot at the good will of the merciful climate. There is 
a tolerance of dirt which amounts almost to a cynic's 
contempt for the decencies of life. The Apostate Julian 
revelling in the tangles of his beard, would have found 
something congenial in the disregard for cleanliness which 
reigns even in the houses of the great. Pashas do their 
Imperial business in palaces of crumbling lath and plaster, 
and beys sweep with great gestures along corridors that 
quake beneath their tread. Nothing is finished, nothing is 
repaired. It is as though the ruling race were a tenant 
conscious that his lease has long since run out. He is 
camping in his decaying tenements, waiting for Time to 
serve upon him the inevitable notice of eviction. Time 
dallies, but he cannot feel the place his own. He lives 
comfortably, nomad that he is. But he is satisfied to 
compromise with decay and make a composition with the 
years. The thought of the future does not disturb him. 

* The fex is fetUy in its origin a Greek headgear, but it is now an 
indispensaible evidence of lo3ralty. To discard it is a proof of treason* 
able designs. I kru w of a case in which two peasants newly rL-turned 
from Austria masqueraded last winter in hats in the little town of 
Strains. They were |Mroinptly thrown into prison. A dronken sentry 
once levelled his rifle :tt me ■ - I was entering the courtyard of the 

ftrefecture at Doiran. He explained afterwards that since 1 wore no 
ez I could not be a friend of the Sultan. The Albanians, however 
wmc a while skoU-cap* which is also toteiated. 



Digitized by Google 




Digitized by Google 



THE RACES OF MACEDONIA 



He knows nothing of his sucoesaors. He feels no obligation 
to exercise husbandry in an estate which is by right 
another's. And so his towns acquire an indescribable air 
of effortless ease. Here men have abandoned the weary 
effort to plane and leveL There are no straight lines. 
There are no obtrusive uprights. Nature and gravity have 
their way unresisted, and it is a way of pleasant curves and 
good-natured slants. Where the process has not gone too 
far the effect is restful and various, as, for example, in 
Monastir, which is a comparatively new town. But in 
Ochrida one could long for a wave of mere material pros- 
perity and a generation of busy and resolute ^irits. 

• There is no more melancholy city in Europe. The great 
lines of its fortress and its walls tell of a glorious past. But 
the modem town is a place of ruins peopled by orphans. 
Every second house is an untenanted skeleton of crumbling 
beams. Every second family has a widow for its head. It 
is only in some of the sterner Albanian towns that one 
encounters solid architecture. There the houses are of 
stone. It is rarely that a window looks on the street, and 
when a narrow aperture does appear in an upper storey one 
looks anxiously towards it, half expecting a rifie to emerge 
throu|^ this menacing slit. But here too, as in all Moslem 
towns, there is one triumph of intentional grace. The whit&< 
washed mosques send their slender minarets, with their sure 
lines, their confident assertion, above the daily welter of 
suUenness and decay, and tall poplars in their courtyard 
soften what might be harsh in the contrast The quavers of 
the Muezzin's falsetto set the effect to music^ and while he 
chants, the Turkish squalor is transformed to an Arabian 
elegance. It b the one effort of construction in all the 
round of the Turk^s activity. He raises no cities ; he erects 
no palaces. He has neither art nor science, nor political 
life. His typical activity is destruction and devastation. 
But a mosque he does build, and the drums that sound 

. tiietr single monotonous note throu^ the wild nights of his 
Holy Month seem to satisfy his need for the positive with 
their reiterated declaration that Allah is, 

• « # « • 



Digitized by Google 



8o MACEDONIA 

One is compelled to write of ''Turks" in dealing with 
Macedonia, but really the term has no ethnological meaning 
^as little as that other term, "Greeks." The first step, 
indeed, towards understanding the Macedonian question 
is to realise that roughly in Macedonia proper — the Mace- 
donia which revolts, which claims to be a unity and asks 
for autonomy — there are neither Greeks nor Turks. For 
this Macedonia is an agricultural country whose sole 
industry is the tilling of the soil ; and its productive popula- 
tion is grouped in villages, Tlie townsmen are parasites 
and middlemen. Among this class one may encounter true 
Turks. They are the official caste, from the Pashas and the 
military staff down to the pe tty employees of post-office 
and the customs. The niuic important among them are 
clerks who have served their apprenticeship to the Hamidian 
burc.iucracy by cumbering the offices of one or other of the 
Ministries in CuiibtciiUinople. These men arc often genuine 
Turks from Asia Minor, but a fair proportion arc Circassians, 
some aie Levantines of nondescript origin, and une may 
meet amouE^ them full-blooded Arabs or nei»roes. The 
sedentary Moslem population of some of the larger towns, 
notably of Uskub, is largely composed of refugees, inanily 
Slav by race, who have fled from the Northern States, 
Bosnia, Servia, and Bulgaria, at the time when they were 
reclaimed for freedom and incorporated once more in 
Europe. These men, known a^ Muhadjirs, are notoriously 
fanatical. They are sometimes the representatives of the 
worst Turkish traditions who found the idea of living 
under Western conditions intolerable, and emigrated of 
their own free will — a description which covers nearly all 
who came from Uobma. More often, I am afraid, they are 
the victims of Christian intolerance and injustice, and these 
include a large colonv of Albanians who were ruthlessly 
expelled from the southern districts of Servia after the 
Russo-Tuikish War. In either case they have a grievance. 
They are landless peasants without remunerative employ- 
ment ; and while some of them swell the class of officials, 
soldiers, and spies, the majority live in poverty and furnish 
the materials of a dangerou^aiid angry mob which is always 



Digitized by Google 

I 



THE RACES OF MACEDONIA 8i 



ready to avenge its historical wrongs by massacre. Another 
con.sKlL'i able Mosieni clement in the towns is furnished by 
the Albanians who have emigrated from their barren High- 
lands in search of employment. Amongst these diverse 
Moslem elements, Slavs, Asiatics, and Albanians, there is 
no community of race. They speak their own languages in 
their homes, and Turkish is an acquired and secondary 
tongue. But all of them are Moslems, and all of them are 
"Turks" in a political sense — ^they belong to the dominant 
caste, they are the rulers and the soldiers, and they are 
bound tnL;ether by a tie of interest, since they form the 
mmonty which exploits the subject native races and lives 
by the inlormal and various tribute of the Christian 
majority. 

Two other races heh^iiL^ to the Turkish t^roup though 
tlu y neither amaigain.itc with it, nor entirely share its 
privileges — the gipsies and the Jews. The gipsies are fairly 
numerous. They occupy separate quarters m the outskirts 
of ail the larger towns. Some are sedentary and follow 
their traditional trade of blacksmith. Others are grooms 
and wantlcring pedbrs, a:ui most of them are supposed tO 
add to their legitimate incomes by skilful and judicious 
horse-thieving. Their colonies are indescribably curious in 
their squalor and decay, ranging from ruined houses which 
shake beneath the blows of sledge-hammers, to huts some 
live feet high, constructed of old petroleum tins eked out 
with remnants of felt and sacking. They live in public, 
and their poverty is elementary. But they have the same 
slight if muscular grace and the same gaiety and ease of 
mind as in happier and weathier lands. Their religion is 
variable and opportunist. For the moment in Turkey they 
are nominal i\Ioslems, but the Turks set small store by their 
orthodoxy, and realise that if in their wanderings they 
should cross the Servian or Bulgarian borders, they would 
straightway embrace Christianity, as the settled gipsies of 
these new countries now do. Still, their lax profession 
serves to range them on the side of the dominant race, and 
in a struggle they would doubtless join the Mohamedan 
mob of the towns. But they are an element which is 

Q 



Digitized by Google 



8a 



MACEDONIA 



poUticaUy and economically n^ligiblei and only Hidr 
picturesqueness entitles them to mention. On St George's 
I>»y, when they celebrate the coming of summer, and their 
girls and women, fearless and nnveiled, don their brightest 
jackets and baggiest tronseis of yellow, green, and pink, and 
foot it in procession, with soog^ and cymbals, to cut fresh 
boughs from some favoured grove, thqr add a rare grace 
and movement to a world of nightmares and panics which 
knows little of gaiety and mudi of care and fear. 

The Jews of Macedonia are more numerous and im- 
portant. They must always have formed a considerable 
element of the population, as we learn from St Paul in the 
first and from Benjamin of Tudela in the twelfth century. 
But their chief strain to-day has been drawn from Spain. 
They are the descendants of the eadles driven out by 
Ferdinand and Isabella. These refugees must have been 
numerous enough to absorb the earlier settlements, for 
Spanish, oddly contorted and corrupted, is everywhere the 
hmguage of the Macedonian Jews. Their outlook on h'fe is 
completely Oriental. They have no reason in their history 
to love the Christians. Interest and sympathy alike dictate 
an alliance with the Turks. They have their reward in a 
degree of immunity from oppression and in a complete con- 
fidence which no Christian race ever enjoys even when it 
happens under the dictates of some temporary political 
exigency, to be cultivating an understanding with the Turks. 
To some extent the schools maintained by the Alliance 
Ism&iU are breaking down the complete isolation in which 
the Jews of Turkey have lived, while the active commercial 
intercourse between the Jewish firms of Salonica and their 
co-religionists of Budapest and Vienna is helping to give 
them a fresh orientation. But they remain stubbornly 
Turcophil. Their new European education, such as it is, 
brings them no nearer to the Christian races who draw their 
knowledge and their political ideals from tiie same Western 
sources, and they remain as isolated as they were when their 
whole culture was the lore of the Talmud. This attitude of 
the Turkish Jews has serious political consequences, since 
it goes far to influence the sympathies of the great news- 



Digitized by Googl 



THE RACES OF MACEDONIA 83 



papers and press agencies of the West, which iivc owned 
and managed by Jews, and thus delays and distorts the 
working of European opinion. 

There are Jewish colonies of long standing and some 
importance in Monastir and Castoria ; and in most of the 
less poverty-stricken smaller towns they are largely repre- 
sented. Indeed, their extension is only prevented by the 
hostility of the Christian merchants who dread their com- 
petition, and now usually adopt the precaution of fixing the 
market day on Saturday — apiece of sharp practice which has 
effectually prevented their settlement in several commercial 
centres of recent growth. It is in Salonica, however, that 
they attain their greatest glory and influence. Salonica is 
that rare thing in modem Europe, a city whose population 
is by majority Jewish. The Jews can hardly number less 
than 80,000. They monopolise the commerce, control the 
shipping, and eclipse the Greeks not only in business but in 
" society " as well. Their showy and hideous villas, designed 
in Rococo fashion to produce a maximum of display, give 
to Salonica's suburb an air of quite European vulgarity. 
Within the town the middle classes throng the narrow lanes 
and the forbidding and mysterious courtyards with their 
projecting upper storeys and protruding eaves. They patrol 
the streets in their long gabardines, and their women retain 
their mediieval costume, gwisb and dicolkUe, They are 
conspicuous and at their ease. They dominate the town, 
managing Turks and overawing Christians. Commerce is 
not their only avocation* The lower classes have a 
monopoly of the hart)our-work and provide the boatmen 
and the porters of the quay, who tolerate no competition 
from other races, and are a law to themselves in the streets 
—indeed, the Christians go in fear lest the sturdy Jewish 
porters should some day join the Turkish mob in a general 
massacre* This Jewish predominance makes Salonica 
unique among Levantine seaports, where it is usually the 
Greek element which impresses its character on the town. 

Satonica has the moral squalor of Europe with the 
physical squalor of the East. Picturesque it may be with 
its beautiful Byzantine churcbesi its Roman triumphal archi 



84 



MACEDONIA 



and its castles and bastions which recall the brief empire of 
the Crusaders. But the main impression is one of ugliness 
and materialism* The phice seems oddly isolated^ and when 
caged within its walls it becomes a sort of puztle by what 
magic one reached a place so di£Eerent from the idyllic 
Macedonian valleys to the norths or the fairy gulf of Volo to 
the south. Clyinpus across the bay dwarfs and rebukes it^ 
and makes it trivisiL It is a town of contradictions where 
men buy by telegraph in the costumes of the ghetto^ and turn 
the stately Castilian of the Middle Ages into a patois fw nasty 
pleasures and petty gains. And yet there lingers in Salonica 
a strange relic of a great enthusiasm, the flotsam of a wave 
of idealism which has hardly its parallel in the history of 
Europe. Besides the 80,000 orthodox Jews of Salonica, 
there is a sect of renegades, known as the Dounm^ who 
number some 30|000 souls. They are equally distrusted by 
Turks and Jewsy despite their nominal adherence to Islam. 
They live apart, and so dread any miadng of their blood with 
the Turks that they make a practice of betrothing their 
children before they are born to avoid the risk of an unwel- 
come proposal. They date from the Annus Mirabilis, when, 
as if in sympathy with the expectations of our own Ana- 
baptists and FifUi Monarchy men, a Jewish Messiah arose 
in the Levant Sabatai Sevt of Smyrna obtained a more 
dian local fame. Every ghetto in Turkey accepted him, 
introduced his ritual into its synagogues, blaioned h» initials 
on its walls, abandoned commerce, and gave itself over to 
penance and preparation. For a year honesty reigned in 
the Levant In Europe broadsheets, which told how trium- 
phant hosts of the dect were marching in his name to 
Palestine, spread the Messiah's fame through Germany, 
Poland, and Italy, and even from distant Amsterdam 
pilgrims flocked to Turkey to receive his blessing. Un- 
happily it was part of his programme to beard the Grand 
Turk in his palace and to lead him in chains at the feet of 
the ''celestial lion" which was to carry him to Zion. 
Arriving in Constantinople, Sabatai was arrested and im- 
prisoned. Still, all went well, since the local authorities 
who were coining money from the tribute which they levied 



Digitized by Googl 



THE RACES OF MACEDONIA 85 



on the pilgrims visited the Messiah's dungeon, hushed 
the scandal up. The catastrophe only came when a rival 
Messiah carried tales to court There Sabatai was sum- 
moned and bidden to perform a miracle on the spot This 
took the. uncomfortable form of standing as a butt for the 
archers of the Imperial Guard. When Sabatai flinched he 
was offered the dioice of impalement or conversion to 
Islam. He chose the latter, and such was his influence 
with the Jews that after this exposure and renunciation 
thousands of his adherents followed him in a voluntary 
acceptance of Islam. The Dounm6 of Salonica are their 
descendants. Two centuries of expectation have not 
dimmed their hope or corroded their loyalty, and amid 
the rumours of massacre and revolution in tiie hurrying 
bazaars of modem Salonica, they still await the second 
coming of their reneigade Messiah. 

With luck, a traveller in Macedonia may hear six distinct 
languages and four allied dialects spoken in the same 
market-place. If it is a northern centre, for example 
Uskub, the peasant women who handle the raw wool and 
hawk their own homespun, may use two ^vonic dialects, 
which vary slightly but still appreciably. The women who 
come from the hilly country to the nc»th are dad in white 
dresses embroidered in black and 0reen in the most decora- 
tive andent designs. The Slav they speak shows Servian 
influence. Mingling with them are the women from the 
villages of the plain, whose taste is usually for red em- 
broidery, and their Slav speech, if it must be classed, tends 
rather to Bulgarian than to Servian. The merchants in the 
booths belong to three races. There are some Greeks, but 
they probably are immigrants from Salonica and the South, 
who came with the railway. Jostling with them are the 
]e\vs, who also came from Salonica and speak their Spanish 
jargon. More numerous are the Vlachs or Wallachians, 
descendants of Roman colonists^ perhaps the oldest towns- 
men in the place, and they speak indifferently their own Latin 
(Roumanian) dialect, or the Slav of the peasants with whom 
they have dune business for centuries, or the culture* 



Digitized by Google 



86 



MACEDONIA 



language of the Groeks which has oome to fhem tfarou^ 
their schools and tiieir Churches. Thqr are exceUent men 
ol hosineis ; tb^ hold their own against Greeks and Jews ; 
and unUke them they contriw as a rule to li^ on nei^- 
bourly terms with the Stxn* They are lairly numerous in 
Macedonia (perhaps aoo/)oo souls^ or nearly a tenth ol the 
population)^ but scattered as they are in isolated mountain 
villages or in town communitieSy they make no territorial 
ctaims and act in politics as a makeweight^ for whose 
alliance Slavs and Greeks eagerly conq>ete. To complete 
the picture, there will be crowds of Northern Albanians 
(Ghc^X come to sdl their cattl^ a few Southern 

Albanians (Tosks) in white kilts, speaking a distinct dialect 
of their own, who may be acting as cava$ses to officials or 
merdiants or Europeans. Scattered about yon may notice 
a few gipsy horse-dealers whose native speech is Romany, 
and a number of soldiers, ^ies, and officials, who under* 
stand nothing but Turkish. In short, one may distinguish 
in the Babel two Slav and two Albanian dialects, Vlach, 
Greek, Turkish, Hebrew-Spanish, and Romany, But on 
analysis only Albanian, Slav and Vlach can claim to be 
genuine Macedonian languages, if one understands by the 
vague term ^Macedonia" the region which conjures and 
revolts and claims its independence from Europe. There is 
no lingua franca. Hard necessity imposes some knowledge 
of elementary Turkish upon the majority of the male popu* 
lation, but they rarely speak it with ease; the peasants 
seldom understand more than a few words of it, and it has 
never become a medium of intercourse between different 
Christian races. Greek is more serviceable as a polite or 
commercial language, but its day is over, and save in the 
south, it is only the older generation of the Slavs which can 
speak it. French is now taking its place. Slav (and particu- 
larly the Bulgarian dialect) is the one language with which 
no native of the northern and central districts can dispense. 

The towns, however, do not reproduce . the. jeal distribu- 
tion of population in Macedonia. Roughly speaking, Turks. 
dreekSy Jews, and Gipsies are found only in die towns and 
may be almost ignored 'in a broad yjewlof jli^^ 



Digitized by 



niE RACES OF MACEDONIA 87 

efthnoff^phy. It is long, no doubt, before that conviction 
forces itself upon the traveller. He will not derive it from 
the books and newspapers he has studied. They are 
written by journalists and travellers who have rarely been 
permitted to stray far outside the towna There is a I<^nd 
that travelling in the interior of Turkey is unsafe* That 
legend is sedulously fostered by the Turin, who are anxious 
to avail themselves of any pretejct which will prevent 
Europeans from witnessing the misery and misgovernment 
of the rural population. It is encouraged by the native 
Christians of ttie towns, a tioiid folk who seldom (and with 
good reason) trust their own lives on a country road. And 
lastly, the few travellers who have performed the feat are not 
di^K^ed to make light of their own achievements. But 
when one has ridden and walked alone over the roads and 
pathways of Crete and Macedonia, one ceases to put much 
faith in the fable. But if travelling in the interior is really 
moderately safe for Europeans, it is certainly uncomfortable. 
There are no tolerable inns save in three towns upon the 
railway which Europeans frequent— Uskub, Monastir, and 
Salonica — ^the roads are so execrable that a carriage journey 
is a purgatory, while saddle-horses, though cheap and good 
if one buys, are seldom to be had for hire.* If the risk 
and discomfort do not suffice to deter the traveller, the 
Turks never hesitate, unless he has strong official bacldng, 
to stop him peremptorily. The result is that it is of the 
towns that the traveller writes, in the towns that he forms 
his impressions, and from the townsmen that he gathers his 
knowledge. The market-place with its six languages amd its 
four dialects remains in his mind as flie type of Macedonia. 
Tl^ confusion and conflict of races is his main preoccupa* 
tion. He moves among the consulates whose business is 
the creation by " propaganda " of artificial nationalities. It 
may escape him that the real Macedonia is the rural M ace* 
donia, a land of villa g e comtnuriitieSf w here we may ncle for 
w eeSswIthout encountering so much a s a hamlet whose 
native language is other than ^Bulgarian gr Alhanian 
There are, it is true, a few real Turkish settlements in 
' Sec Note X at the cad oi Uic chapter. 



I 



Digitized by Google 



88 

* 



MACEDONIA 



Macedonia, or along its fringe^ wfaidi tive by agricultare* 
The Moslems of K^iilar, on the southern verge of ^at is 
properly Macedonia, are genuine Osmanli Turks, who are 
said to have been exiled from Asia Minor in order that they 
might be isolated. There is also a similar Turkish belt 
inland from the i£gean in the rich tobacco-growing country 
between Serres and Drama, but this again is on the fringe 
(the eastern fringe) of what is properly Macedonia. Else- 
where even the Moslems of the rural districts come within 
our generalisation. They are either Albanians or Slavs,' 
converted by force or allured by self-interest to Islam, and 
while politically they form part of the ruling caste, in 
language, origin, and even in many of their social customs 
and institutions they do not differ from their Christian 
countrymen. As for the Greeks, they are nowhere a village 
people north of Castoria, save in the peninsula of Chalcidice, 
the island of Thasos, and along the coastiine of the i£gean. 

While it is true that the main elements of the rural popu" 
lation are only two in number, Slavs and Albanians, the real 
Macedonian complication lies not so much in the multi- 
plicity of its warring races as in the difficulty of isolating 
them. It is comparatively easy to say what Albania proper 
is. It is the mountainous home of an unconquered race 
which faces the Adriatic from the Gulf of Arta in the south 
to Montenegro in the north. It includes the greater part of 
Epiros with the town of Jannina, the regions round Koritza 
and Elbasan as far east as the Lake of Ochrida, and the 
wild northern highlands on whose Mnge lie the towns of 
Dibra, Prizrend, Ipek, and Scutari. Within these limits, 
save, indeed, witiiin the walls of these four towns, 
there are few Slavs, and the population is the most 
homogeneous which can be found anywhere within 
the Turkish Empire. But for the Jews and Greeks in 
Jannina town, and some scattered villages of Vlachs, it is 
purely Albanian. But, on the other hand, one cannot say 
that the rest of the country is Slav. Physically, the limit 

' These are generally known as Poraacks. Tliey form a solid popu* 
lation in the almost purely Moslem belt between Drama and the 
Bulgarian frontier. 



Digitized by 



THE RACES OF MACEDONIA 89 



between Albania proper and Macedonia is abnspt and well 
defined. It is the Pindus rang^i which also divides Thessaly 
from EpimSy skirts the Lake of Oduida on its western shore, 
and runs northward to the plain of K6ssovo. It is a stately 
range of glorious snow-dad summits, and it forms a wall so 
impenetral>le that, as one looks at it from the plain, the 
peaks seem to run north and south in a continuous and 
gently undulating line, and one feels as though there must 
be some pathway of the giants connecting them, along 
which one might walk, hardly descending between the 
summits, from Montenegro to the Gulf of Corinth. And, 
indeed, this fancy is not very far from the truth. The 
Pindus range is really a continuous mountain^wall. There 
are only two practicable passes in all its northern extent* 
The first is the road from Elbasan to Ochrida, which follows 
the track of the Roman Via Egnatta, The second is the 
road from Uskub vid Tetovo (Chalcandelen) to Prizrend, 
which winds over the shoulder ol the Schar (Scardus). 
The latter, indeed, can only be called a pass by courtesy. 
Its summit was snow-clad when I crossed it in a blazing 
June, and gentians and Alpine roses flourished along the 
pathway. A "pass" suggests a road to the European 
mind, but these great Imperial highways are little more 
than sheep-tracks, along which one may lead, but hardly 
ride, a mule. So unbroken and virginal is this great chain, 
which ends not timidly or gradually, but in the superb 
conical peak of Liubotrn ("the lovely thorn"), that 
dominates the plain of Uskub and the fields of K^ssovo, 
as Olympus dominates Salonica. Here, one would have 
thought, was a natural frontier which ought to have 
separated Albania from Macedonia. But political con- 
ditions have made sport of geography, and there is to-day 
an Albania beyond Albania. It is probable that in the 
earlier centuries, before the Turkish conquest, the Pindus 
and Schar did divide the Albanians from the Slavs. Indeed, 
such encroachment as there was was rather in an opposite 
sense. It was the Slavs who invaded Albania. Since the 
Turkish conquest, however, the Albanian race has more 
liidu recovered its own. There has \xtn, particularly in 



I 



Digitized by Google 



90 MACEDONIA 

the last two oenturifia, ft steady movement of ttie Moslem 
Albanians eastward. Under the Crescent they are winning 
back more than all that they lost under the Cross. It is 
difficult to obtain statistics, and the country-folk will not 
g^eralise on the subject^ but they will tell you that such 
an Albanian village settlement was made some eighty years 
ago, or that a village which used to own its own land, and 
was inhabited only by Bulgarians^ came under Ibe yoke of 
an Albanian diief a matter of fifty years back. This sort of 
thing has been going on steadily throughout the western 
half of Macedonia for two or three centuries at least, and 
the process is not yet complete. It is most noticeable in 
the north, and the country which was once the headquarters 
of the Servian race, and still bears the name of Old Servia, 
has now a population that is two-thirds Albanian. Else- 
where the emigration has been much less considerable, but 
it is still noteworthy. The whole province (Vilayet) of 
Monastir is studded with Albanian settlements. One finds 
them in enviable positions surrounded by three or four 
Bulg^uian villages, over which the Albanians exercise a 
sort of semi^feudal terrorism. But the Albanian colonies 
are not mainly village communities. More often a chief 
(perhaps an ez*brigand who bought his peace with the 
Turks) has settled down in a big, rambling farm, with a 
fortified keep and a few retainers^ and gradually acquired 
the position of landlord and the title of bey, with all that 
these things imply in economic servitude to the Slav 
peasantry. It is naturally in the more desirable districts, 
and, above all, in the fertile plains, that this has taken 
place.' The odd result follows that the wealthier Bui- 
garian villages are those on the lower slopes of the moun- 
tains, or even in rugged and isolated glens, since these 
have often been left more or less unmolested. The 
villages on the plains are mere collections of huts and 
cabins inhabited by serfs who work for an Albanian master. 
This movement of population was naturally welcomed and 
encouraged by the Turks. It tended to enslave and weaken 
their Slavonic subjects, and it helped to base their own 
' See Note B. at the end of the chapter. 



Digitized by 



THE RACES OF MACEDONIA 91 



politioal ascendancy on a ''garrison/^ as an Irishman 
would call it, consisting of men whose material prosperity 
was involved in the continuance of Mohamedan rule. 

The Albanians have now become so much a Macedonian 
race that their shepherds regularly invade even the Central 
Vardar valley in winter. There are also Albanian villages 
deliberately planted by the Turks for obvious strategic 
r^ons along the frontiers of free Bulgaria. Indeed, there 
was even some talk of planting Albanian colonies in the 
Adrianople region after the late insurrection. 

« « • * # 

Of the races which inhabit Macedonia to-day only the 
Albanians have any claim to be autochthonous. Their 
southern branch, the Tosks, are most likely the lineal 
descendants of the ancient Epirotes. Their northern 
branch, the Gh^, are probab^ the people whom the 
ancients called lUyrians. Of the ancient Macedonians 
whose original seat lay between Monastir and Vodena, no 
heirs remain, unless indeed any renmants of them escaped 
civilisation and became confounded with the kindred 
Albanians. The Thracians may poasibly survive in the 
modern Vlachs, at least in so far as they became absorbed 
by Roman colonies. All these original races, though 
doubtless near cousins of the Greeks, must have been very 
imperfectly Hellenised during the classical and Macedonian 
periods. The Greek colonies were never much more than 
trading centres along the coast, and what was Greek in 
ancient times is Gredk to-day. There is no evidence that 
the interior was ever settled by a rural Greek population. 
With the Roman conquest came a long period in which 
the two languages and the two civilisations struggled for the 
mastery. Mihtary colonies were scattered liberally, and this 
planting of Latin towns took place only after a ruthless 
destruction and uprooting of the older Greek cities, whose 
populations were sold into slavery. Round these colonies 
the aboriginal inhabitants may have clustered, and acquired 
the Latin speech which the modern Vhichs still retain. One 
Byzantine writer remarks significantly that the Thracians 
never took kindly to Greek, while they acquired Latin with 



Digitized by Google 



92 



MACEDONIA 



ease (Prisci, ''Historia/' p. 190). By the sixth century 
Latin had become the language of a consideraUe part of 
Epirus, Macedonia, and Thrace. We have acquired a 
habit of talking of the Byzantine Empire as though it had 
been a Greek Empire. It hardly acquired a national 
character until its long, final agony began. It was the 
Crusades which emphasised its Hellenism, by teaching 
the Eastern world that the Latin West was still peopled by 
barbarian hordes. Then in the double struggle against 
Franks and Turks a Greek patriotism revived too late. 
But during the earlier centuries of the Empire the Greeks 
were not even a ruUng caste. The Emperors themselves 
were cosmopolitans of any and every stock. Many of the 
best of them were Armenians ; Justinian was actually a 
Slav; few were Greeks. Nor was the Eastern Church 
naturally or originally Greek. The Arians showed a 
marked preference for the Latin language, and the perse- 
cutions of the Catholic party in which they indulged had 
sometimes the character of an anti-Greek movement. It 
was indeed during this period of persecution, while Latin- 
speaking Arians dominated the court that the Orthodox 
Church became, what it has always remained, the rallying 
point of Greek patriotism and the only outward embodi- 
ment of the Greek national idea. Latin, moreover, even in 
Justinian's time, was still so far the official language that his 
g^t legal codes were composed in it. 

Whatever Greek population there may ever have been in 
the interior of rural Macedonia must have been effectually 
uprooted by the barbarian invasions. Race succeeded race, 
conqueror trod on the heete of conqueror, and though few 
of the strangers effected a permanent settlement until the 
coming of the Slavs, they destroyed the earlier civilisation 
and ruined the wealthier classes who had adopted Greek 
culture. The invaders broke up the hug^ estates, and the 
slaves who tilled them were appropriated by the barbarians, 
or else regained their freedom during this secuhur anarchy. 
The cultured minority, reduced to penury, and driven to 
seek refuge in walled towns, sank to the level of their own 
slaves. The impoverishment was general, and with the 



Digitized by 



THE RACES OF MACEDONIA 93 



wealth of the old aristocracy its Hellenic culture disap- 
peared. The gciitral movement to the towns, aided by the 
amazing policy of tlic Emperors, created that unique 
product of Eastern conditions — the Lcvantuic population. 
A Levantine is essentially a townsman, but not every towns- 
man m the East is a Levantine. The true Levantine 
belongs to a race which inhabits only the towns — Greek, 
Jewish, or mongrel-European. He is bred in town, and 
froiii the cradle to the grave he never quits the town. He 
despises the country and the ruder alien races which 
inhabit the country. Fear confines him within the walls. 
He knows nothing of muscular work. He has his con- 
querors and his rulers always with him. He becomes 
liiiiid and physically incapable of resistance. The growth 
of this Levantine population had begun centuries before 
the coming of the Turks. The country was either a desert 
or a hostile region inhabited by strange barbarians. What- 
ever military or patriotic instincts the Greeks of the 
Macedonian towns may have possessed were systematically 
suppressed by Byzantine policy. The theory of Con- 
stantinople was that the function of the settled Greek 
population was to earn taxes, and Byzantine taxation must 
have been oppressive both in amount and in incidence. 
The Greeks were not only exempt from military service 
even for the defence of their own provinces, but actually 
forbidden to enlist. They were already what they are under 
the Turks, a purely civilian population grinding out tribute 
for a costly governing machine. No landed proprietor or 
agricultural labourer was allowed to serve, and the army 
was composed entirely of mercenaries and barbarians. Up 
till the reign of Justinian the Greek cities still possessed 
some local independence. But Justinian, casting about for 
fresh sources of Imperial income, confiscated their revenues. 
The consequence was that the roads were everywhere 
nei^lected, and the police disbanded. Without roads and 
without security the cities became more than ever isolated, 
and the general decline towards barbarism and decay pro- 
ceeded at a swifter pace than ever. Finally, as if to com- 
plete the ruin of Hellenism in Macedonia, Justinian, who 



Digitized by Google 



94 



MACEDONIA 



lived in constant terror of revolt, suppressed the militias 
which the Greek cities had begun to revive under the 

menace of the barbarian invasions, and left them exposed 
to the mercy of any raiding horde. When a professor in 
modern Athens puts forward the theory that the Mace- 
donians of to-day are really Greeks in disguise, the answer 
is to be found in this chapter of history. Macedonia never 
was Greek, but such Hellenic civilisation as it possessed was 
ruined long before the coming of the Turks, and long before 
the rise of the Servian and Bulgarian Empires. It was 
ruined by an unconscious conspiracy between the Byzantine 
Empire and the barbarians. 

The interior once abandoned by the settled civilised 
population which paid taxes, its fate became a matter of 
indifference to Byzantium. The barbarians acted after 
their kind, settled where they pleased, and raided as thev 
pleased. The only concern of the Empire was now its 
commerce. The diminished Greek population occupied 
the sea-coast of the .tEgean and the Adriatic, and inland 
the sole anxiety of its rulers was to keep open the 
great main roads wliich carried the wealth of Asia to 
Western markets. Indian trade now followed the Black 
Sea route, and the Via Egnatia from Salonica to Dyrra- 
chium was still kept open. The Goths, the Huns, and the 
Avars did not settle in Macedonia. But the Slav iinan 
tribes which accompanied the Avars as allies undouL l';rMy 
did settle, and their viliiiL^rs were to be found even soulh of 
the Via Egnatia, so early as the reign of Heraclius (565- 
633 A.D.). Serbs and Croats were actually invited by 
Heraclius to settle. As though to encourage barl>aiians 
at the expense of Greeks, they lived tax-free and served as 
militia, despite the fact that they were cultivators, and they 
doubtless amalgamated with the earlier Slavonic immi- 
grants. These primitive Slav settlers differed widely from 
the more savage barbarians. They were not so much a 
pastoral as an agricultural people. Thev di-ired to settle 
rather than to raid. They grouped thetn-ch cs in villages, 
winch enjoved a certain communal liic, and expected to be 
iett in local independence. They were not properly a 



Digitized by Google 



THE RACES OF MACEDONIA 95 



political people. They fonned no orguiiaed State. They 
had no aristocmcy^ and their leaders were probably elective. 
They formed netttier clans nor towns. Their unit was the 
hamlet within ^icfa their knowledge and their social life 
was contained. They were jealous of any authority which 
sought to unite them, and ready to engage in inter- 
necine feuds. Their sense of race must have been quite 
undeveloped, and they readily blended with any other 
kindred people speaking a Slav tongue. For them the 
village was the one political reality. Servian and Bulgarian 
conquests can have altered little in their daily life, and even 
the Ttuldsh tyranny still left them their indissoluble political 
atom — ^thetr village. They must have been, ten and twelve 
centuries back, the same primitive and conservative people 
which they are to-day, plodding, laborious, unaggressive, 
with the fraternity of village life for the foundation of theii 
virtues. Christianity has altered their theory of the next 
world, but it can have changed very litde in their view of 
this. 

The purely Slavonic races, whether they were called Serbs, 
Croats, Slovenes, or Antai, had undoubtedly peopled Mace- 
donia by the end of the seventh century. But they pre- 
tended to no national cohesion, and were not politiodly a 
menace to Byzantium. They were rather settlers than 
conquerors. It required the infusion of non-Slavonic 
blood to fire them with political ambitions and to organise 
them into a rival to the Extern Empire. Thb impulse 
came from the Bulgarians (Volga-men), a non-Aryan 
people akin to the Turks, who bad long been setded on the 
Volga. Their organisation contrasted sharply with that of 
the Slavs. They had an absolute king or khan, who ruled 
them as an Oriental despot. They were polygamists^ owned 
slaves, and were accustomed to militaiy discipline. Like 
the TMes, they diaved tiieir heads and wore pigtails. They 
burned their widows, and indulged in human sacrifices. 
These disagreeable Astatic nomads had no civilisation of 
their own. They adopted the Slav language, while modi- 
fying its structure, and they readily amalgamated and inter- 
niarried with the Slavs. This process may have begun 



Digitized by Google 



96 



MACEDONIA 



before they left the Volgay and it was certainly complete 
before their conversion to Christianity in the year 864, since 
Cyril and Methodius preached to them in Slav. Their 
kingdom was founded near Varna in 678, and it covered 
at first pretty much the territory occupied by modern 
Bulgaria. Though the Bulgarians gave it its organisation 
and made it a power, it must none the less have been pre» 
dominantly Slavonic in blood and in traditions, llieir 
kingdom was hardly consolidated before they began to 
move upon Thrace and Macedonia. They besieged 
Salonica as early as 679, and repeated their invasions 
whenever the Empire was occupied in dealing with the 
Arabs or the Turks. Under their Khan Knimm they 
overran Thrace and twice appeared under the walls of 
Constantinople^ defeated and did to death two emperors 
in succession (Nicephorus and Michael), and made one of 
the immortal legends of the Balkans by converting the 
skuU of Nicephorus into a drinking-cup. Nearly a century 
later (892), under their Khan Simeon, who assumed the 
title of Tsar, the Bulgarians founded their first Empire. It 
extended at first over the whole of Epirus, Macedonia, 
Thrace^ and Bulgaria. Under the third Tsar, Samuel, the 
eastern provinces were lost, but the Empire r^nained firmly 
seated in the west, with its capital at Ochrida, where it 
maintained its independence till ioi8.< It was thus de- 
finitely a Macedonian state, and Ochrida acquired in the 
tradition of the Macedonian Slavs a sentimental prestige 
which it still retains. After an hiatus of over a century and 
a half the Bulgarians once more appear as an Imperial 
Power (1186), under a dynasty of adventurers, by name 
Asen, who were of Vlach origin. It represented an alliance 
between Vlachs and Slavs, and it can have been '^Bulgarian" 
only in the sense that it revived the Bulgarian tradition of 
conquest. It made the most of the anarchy which followed 
the Fourth Crusade, and allied itself sometimes with the 

' The final blow was dealt fay the Emperor Basil, the Bulgar-ldller, 

who is said to have slanc^htcrcd 15,000 Bui [Jarians in a single battle, and 
to have sent back the remnant of 150 with their eyes put out to tell the 
talc to T:>ar SamucL 



Digitized by Google 



THE RACES OF MACEDONIA 



97 



Greeks and sometimes with the Latins. Three its 
sovereigas were sssassinated. The fomth, Asen 11^ was 
the greatest power in Eastern Europe. He ruled the entire 
Bal^n Peninsula including Servia and Albania, and left 
the Latins nothing but Constantinople, with which his 
capital Timovo vied in the splendour of its buildings and 
its material prosperity. But the second Bulgarian Empire 
fell to pieces immediately after Asen's death in 1241, though 
Bulgaria retained a shadow of independence until Timovo 
was burned by the Turks in 1393. The interval between 
Asen's death and the coming of the Turks was marked by 
the rise of an ephemeral Servian State. It first attained a 
national existence about 11 50, under Stephen Nemanya, 
who was an elective chief in Novi Bazar. Its natural 
extension was ratiier to the north than towards Macedonia. 
Its centre was in the plain of Kossovo (Old Servia), and it 
included Bosnia^ MontenegrOi and part of the modem 
Servia. After the collapse of the second Bulgarian Empire 
Servia became the dominant power in the Balkans, and 
now pushed southward over Macedonia and Albania. 
Under its last Emperor, Stephen Dushan, who fixed his 
capital at Uskub, it covered the whole Balkan Peninsula 
except Salonica and Constantinople^ Stephen defeated 
Hungary and the Turks, and seemed on the point of taking 
Constantinople and dotroying the Byzantine Empire in 
its last refuge when he died suddenly, perhaps by poison, 
in his camp (1356). His empire, like Aaen's, collapsed on 
his death at the moment of its greatest splendour, and its 
discordant remnants became the easy prey of the Turks, 
who finally crushed a weak and disloyal coalition of Servian^ 
Albanian, and Bulgarian princelings on the fatal field of 
Kossovo (1389). The Servian aristocracy either fled to 
Bosnia, Montenegro, and Hungary, or accq;>ted Islam, and 
Macedonia l>eGame once more a country of little villages 
whose whole struggle henceforward was to maintain their 
isolation and their identity under yet another alien tyranny.* 

* This sketch of the political vicissitudes of Macedonia before the 
coming of the Turks is necessarily incomplete. There was al^o a 
nther flourishing Vlach State, whose oantrt was in Hietsaly, which 



Digitized by Google 



9« 



MACEDONIA 



Seven centuries elapsed between the complete settlement 
of Macedonia by Slavonic races and its final conquest by 
the Turks* Its history during this period suggests litde 
progress towards any stable organisation. It was not the 
Byzantines or the Serbs who destroyed the second Bulgarian 
Empire. It was not the Turks who destroyed the Servian 
Empire. Both fell to pieoesi as it were, ol their own weight. 
They fell, both of them, at the moment of tiieir greatest 
splendour and widest extension, a fact which suggests that 
they must have l>een held together, not by the consent of 
the people, but by the strong will of a vigorous tyrant. It 
was not in accordance with the traditions of the Slavs to 
accept a dynasty or build up an Empire ; loyalty to a 
leader of genius^ such as Dushan must have been, was 
another matter. But, indeed, except so far as their dis- 
appearance left the field open to the Turks, there is no 
great reason to regret either tiie Servian or the Bulgarian 
Empire. They were purely military Powers, and their 
glory, such as it was, reposed soldy on the achievements of 
their arms. Their administration was modelled on that of 
Byzantium. Their official Church— despite the fact that 
most of their Emperors coquetted with Rome — reproduced 
all the characteristics of Greek orthodoxy. Their literature 
was imitative, and, indeed, hardly existed save in transla- 
tions from Greek ecclesiastical works. Nor was even their 
architecture their own, so far as they built at all. They 
either copied Byzantium or imported artists from Italy. 
Their civiHsation, in short, was second-hand, and it must 
have been a growth so brief and so divorced from the life 
of the people that it neither left its impress on the peasants, 
uui in Luiii received the quickening of their peculiar genius. 

included in its dominions the southern slopes of the Pindus and 
Southern Macedonia up to Castona. It was scmi-indepcndent as eaxiy 
at the latter half of the eleventh centniy, and survived until Dushaa'a 
conquests — a period of three hundred years, which is in the Balkans a 
highly respectable antiquity. It must not be confused with the Vlacho« 
Bulgariaa Empire of tne Aaens. Fn>in 1204 to X232 Salonica was the 
seat of a Latin crusaders' kingdom, under Boniface of Monferrat This 
was destroyed hy the new Greek power wliich had arisen in Epinis 
^nder the Coinneni» 



Digitized by Google 




Digitized by Google 



TH£ RACES OF MACEDONIA 99 



The villages cnntiimed to live their own life, and whatever 
was native and original among the Slavs of Macedonia grew 
directly from peasant soil. The popular ballads have more 
V9.\ue than the ecclesiastical in stories. The native Bogomil 
heresy (see p. 67) was a vastly more interesting attempt 
to understand the Universe than anything to be found in 
the fornrularies of the official Church. The traditional 
embroideries of the peasant women sui^^i^est that the instinct 
for art might under happier conditions have found some 
worthy expression. But Macedonia never had its chance. 
The Crusaders, the Turks, and the absence of political 
ideals among tlie Slavs, prevented the formation of any 
stable State which might have kept the peace and allowed 
them to develop on their own lines. A toierant tyranny, 
even if alien, might have brought this about as well as a 
native Power, provided they had been allowed to lead the 
village lite for which they have so marked a tastCi in com- 
parative freedom and security. 

• « * ★ » 

It is small wonder that a history so troubled and so un- 
certain has borne its fruit in endless political controversies. 
One hundred years ago it would have been hard to find a 
central Macedonian who could liave answered with any 
intelligence the question whether lie were Servian or 
Bulgarian by race. The memory of tlie past had vanished 
utterly and nothing remained save a vat^ne tradition among 
the peasants that their forefathers had once been free. ! 
questioned some boys from a remote mountain village near 
Ochrida which had neither teacher nor resident priest, and 
where not a single inhabitant was able to read, in order 
to discover what amount of traditional knowledge they 
possessed, i took them up to the ruins of the Bulgarian 
Tsar's fortress which dominates the lake and the plain from 
the summit of an abrupt and curiously rounded hill. 
"Who built this place ?" I asked them. The answer was 
significant — "The Free Men." "And who were they?" 
"Our grandfathers." "Yes, but were they Serbs or 
Bulgarians or Greeks or Turks?" "They weren t Furks, 
they wm Christiaiis." And this seeoied to be about the 



Digitized by Google 



I 



ICO MACEDONIA 

measure of their knowledj^e. I think the lads, who had 
just seen an insurrection, had thtir own romantic iiotions 
of politics. The old fortress did mean something to them. 
It reminded them that they had a free past. But obviously 
Tsar Simeon's Empire and all its ephemeral successors had 
quite faded from the popular consciousness.^ It is some- 
times said that even the name Bulgarian was forfrotten. 
That IS, i think, an exaggeration. Ikit neither Bulgars nor 
Serbs were officially recognised by the Turks as a distmct 
race, as the Greeks always were. In Europe, it is true, they 
were hardly so much as a memory. Voltaire writes in 
Candidc of an imaginary " Bulgarian " army which per- 
formed amazing "Bulgarian" exercises as though the 
name meant no more than Cloud-Cuckoo-Land or Kuri- 
tania. The Serbs fared somewhat better. Their Empire, 
though no more solid or enduring than the Bulgarian, came 
later in time, and round its destruction at Kossovo lingered 
a passionate and sentimental legend enshrined in a cycle 
of interminable ballads. Certainly in the real Servian 
country of Kossovo the past was never forgotten. Then, 
too, while both the Bulgarian Patriarchate of Ochrida 
and the Servian Patriarchate of Ipek were suppressed 
as early as 1570 through the machinations of the Greeks, 
the Archbishopric of Ipek which succeeded the Patriar- 
chate, partially contrived to retain its national Servian 
character until 1767. Finally, the Serbs had in the free 
Republic of Ragusa a centre which, despite its Catholicism 
and its thoroughly Italian character, none the less did 
much for the Servian language and issued from its presses 
many volumes of Servian verse. The Servians in Hungary 
also profited by European culture ; while the liberation of 
modern Servia in the first decades of the last century was 
facilitated by its distance from Constantinople. The Bul- 
garians enjoyed none of these advantages. Their eccle- 
siastical autonomy was more completely suppressed. They 
had no free sister like little Ragusa. They had no exiled 
brethren in Europe. They were within easy striking 
distance of the capital. Inevitably, then, their awakening 

' See Note C. at end of ohapter 



Digitized by Google 



THE RACES OF MACEDONIA loi 



came later^aad but for the patronage of Russia it might 
never have come at all. 

Are the Macedonians Serbs or Buigars ? The question 
is constantly asked and dogmatically answered in Belgrade 
and Sofia. But the lesson of history obviously is that 
there is no answer at all. They are not Serbs, for their 
blood can hardly be purely Slavonic. There must be in 
it some admixture of Bulgarian and other non-Arjran stock 
(Kuman Tartars, Pechenegs^ &c.). On the other hand, they 
can hardly be BulgarianSi for quite clearly the Servian immi- 
grations and conquests must have lelt much Servian blood 
in their veins, and the admixture of non-Aryan blood can 
scarcely be so considerable as it is in Bulgaria. They are 
probably very much what they were before either a Bui- 
garian or a Servian Empire eidsted — a Slav people derived 
from rather various stocks, who invaded the peninsula at 
different periods. But they had originally no dear con* 
sciousness of rao^ and any strong Slavonic Power was 
able to impose itsdf upon them. One may say safely that 
for historical reasons the people of Kossovo and the North- 
west are definitely Serbs, while the people of Ochrida 
are clearly Bulgarians. The affinities of the rest of Mace- 
donia are decided on purely political grounds. Language 
teaches us very little. The differences between literary 
Servian and Bulgarian are not considerable, but tfaey are very 
definite. The Macedonian dialect is neither one nor the 
other, but in certain structuial features it agrees rather with 
Bulgarian than with Servian. This, however, means little; 
for modern Servian is not the language of Dushan, but the 
dialect of Belgrade. A southern Macedonian finds no 
difficulty in making himself understood in Dushan's 
country (Uskub and Priarend), though he will feel a 
foreigner in Belgrade. One must also discount the 
effects of propaganda. A priest or teacher from Sofia 
or Belgrade who settles in a village will modify its 
dialect considerably in the course of a generation. This 
process may be observed at work round such centres as 
Uskttb^ where both Servians and Bulgarians are active. 
A trained ear can now detect a difference of speech 



Digitized by Google 



I02 



MACEDONIA 



between villages which are only a few miles apart, iind 
even the foreigner notices that while the Bulgarophil 
peasants answer a question in the affirmative with " Da," 
the Serbophils say " Yis." The element of accident in 
these political affinities is very large. It is not uncom- 
mon to find fathers who are themselves officially "Greeks " 
equally proud of bringing into the world "Greek," 
" Servian," " Bulgarian," and " RDuinanian ' children. The 
pasion for education is strong, and the various propagai^das 
pander eagerly to it. If a father cannot contrive to place 
all his sons in a secondary school belonging to the race 
which he himself affects, the prospect of a bursary will 
often mclucc Inm to plant them out in rival establishments. 
It is, of course, a point of honour that a boy who is 
educated at the expense of one or other of these peoples 
must himself adopt its language and its nationality. The 
same process is at work among the villa ^ls. I remember 
vividly my amazement when I encounttred this quaint 
phenomenon during my first visit to MacLcioma. I was 
talking to a wealthy peasant who came in from a neigh- 
bouring village to Monastir market. He spoke Greek well, 
but hardly like a native. ** Is your village Greek," I asked 
him, " or Bulgarian ? " " Well," he replied, " it is Bul- 
garian now, but four years ago it was Greek." The answer 
seemed to him entirely natural and commonplace. " How," 
I asked in some bewilderment, "did that miracle come 
about ? " " Why," said he, " we are all poor men, but we 
want to have our own school and a priest who will look 
after us properly. We used to have a Greek teacher. We 
paid him a year and his bread, while the Greek consul 
paid hnn another ^5 ; but we had no pnest of our own. 
We shared a priest with several other villages, but he was 
very unpunctual and remiss. We went to the Greek Bishop 
to complain, hut he refused to do anything for us. The 
Bulgarians heard of this and they came and made us an 
offer. They said they would give us a pnest who would 
live in the village and a teacher to whom we need pay 
nothing. Well, sir, ours is a poor village, and so of course 
we became Bulgarians." One can picture this rather quaint 



Digitized by Google 



TH£ RAC£S OF MACBXM3N1A loj 



revolution. The iittie man who had once been to Athens 
abancluns the hopeless task of teaching Greek to children 
who had knrnt only Pllnv from their mothers. The legend 
that Alex in cier the Great was a Greek goes out by one 
road, and the rival mytli th;it Alexander was a Bulgarian 
comes in by the other. The Mass, which wis droned 
unpunctually in ancient Greek, is now droned (punctually) 
in ancient Slav. But beneath the ratlier comic aspects of 
this incident the fact remains that the village was now 
obtamnig education in its own tongue, and openmi^ its 
tloors to civilising influences which came to it in a form 
which It could assimilate and make its own. The bribe of 
/"c; did but hasten an inevitable process. I have heard a 
wiUy French consul declare that with a fund of a million 
francs he would undertake to make all Macedonia French. 
He would preach that the Macedonians are the descendants 
of the French crusaders who conquered Salonica in the 
twelfth century, and the francs would do the rest. But 
after all, the Greeks dispose of ample funds^ and yet the 
Greeks have lost Macedonia. 

But undoubtedly any Slav race which belonged to the 
Orthodox faith might have won Macedonia, given the 
necessary tact and the necessary funds. Servia or Monte- 
negro, or even Russia, might have done it. In point of fact 
it is Bulgaria which has succeeded. History and ethnology 
and comparative philology may take what side in the con- 
troversy they please. The Macedonians are Bulgars to-day 
because a free and progressive Bulgaria has known how to 
attract them. Servia did not exercise an influence so com- 
pelling, and the Servian cause in Macedonia proper is in 
coasequence a negligible and artificial movement. It exists 
only in so far as it pays its way, and in so far as the Turks 
encourage it as a counterpoise to the menacing Bulgarian 
agitation. The very fact that the Turks smile upon it is a 
proof that it is innocuous and doomed to futility. As things 
are to-day the Servian consuls are about as likely to win the 
Macedonians for Servia as the American miMionarics are to 
convert them to Protestantism. 
It 18 easy to indicate some ol tbe many reasons for 



Digitized by Google 



104 



MACEDONIA 



Servia's failure.' In the first place, it is only recently that 

Servia has taken much interest in Macedonia. Up till the 
Austrian occupation of Bosnia and Herzegovina Serviu's 
ambitions were directed rather to these genuinely Servian 
lands than to Macedonia. Even after the Treaty of Berlin 
it was long before she realised that the northern and western 
part of her natural heritage was irreparably lost. Then, 
however much she might have wished to repair her error, 
it was too late. The Bulgarians had already created their 
national Church ; the majority of the Macedonian Slavs 
had already adhered to it, and its schools were firmly 
established and thoroughly popular. Servia could not 
bring herself to break with the "Greek" Orthodox Church, 
and accordingly she had no fold into which the Mace- 
donians might be shepherded. Thirdly, her internal weak- 
ness liLcl her hands. She had suffered a disastrous military 
defeat at Slivnitza at the hands of the Bulgarians, and from 
this her prestige in the Balkans has never recovered. Her 
finances were and still are in the utmost disnrdcr ; and while 
King Milan squandered money on his pleasures and sold the 
country to foreign speculators, there was no surplus to spare 
for propaganda. Under Milan and Alexander Servia passed 
through one long and shameful crisis, and her domestic 
revolutions and reigns of terror were preoccupation enough. 
Lastly, one must recognise that, despite tlieir kni^hip and 
their very similar history, there is a profound difference 
between the Bulgarian and the Servian national characters 
— a difference which has its counterpart in two physical 
types.2 The Servians are a plea-u re-loving people, with 
more aesthetic sense and a more excitable disposition than 
the Bulgarians. They have not the same power of con- 
tinuous work, the same indifference to pain, the same 
resolute stolidity, or the same habit of mental application. 
During eighty years of freedom they have made less pro- 
gress morally and materially than the Bulgarians in twenty- 

* I aai speaking here of Macedonia proper. la " Old Servia " the 
Bulgarians have no footing nor do tlMj leek to acquire one. Sea 
Chapter VIII., Section 7, p. 274. 

* i>ce Note D. at end of chapter. 



Digitized by Google 



THE RACES OF MACEDONIA 10$ 



five years. One consequence^of the raj)id econ^^ 
development of Buiga ria l^eTheen that her s teady demand 
for laBoiir ha s~ericburaged a ceaseless flow of Maced onian 

imtffi^^ni^ whn g^^^ a fpw mnnthfi nr a fi>ip yi>ars in the 

prin^palitjy an d then return to their villa ges with their 
savmgs. These men_becqme missionaries of Jthe B ulgaria n 
idea. They spread the famc.oihcr liberty > her wfiallfa^JUid 
iter rapid^progEfiss. The number who go to Servian on the 
other hand, is relatively inconsiderable, and their reports 
can hardly be entirely favourable— though for all her 
political instability Servia still presents a sufficiently 
striking contrast to Turkey. When, in addition to these 
advantages, the Bulgarophil M^cedoQiaoaZ^fcactod their 
marvellous ly-organic revolutionary committee in iS^^ 
the Semah raiia^ rCCfflY fi^ dea th-hlnw. By way of 
emphasising her antagonism to Bulgaria, official Senria 
now adopted an openly Turcophil policy, and nothing 
could l>e more fatal to the pro^)ects of any Christian 
race in Turkey. The Macedonian peasantry will bestow 
their allegiance only on a propaganda which promises 
fhem some speedy prospect of release from the Ottoman 
yoke. Finally, there is this great difference between the 
rival propagaoidas, that while the Bulgarians are working 
for the autononiy of Macedonia, the Servians and the Grrcks 
aim only at its annexation tp jheir own counti^. Thej 
result is that their activities seem to be for the profit ou 
their own land, whereas the Bulgarians are undoubted])^ 
creating a spirit of local Macedonian patriotism. TJid 
Servian movement is a purely official agitation, guidedl 
and financed in Belgrade ; whereas, despite the sympathyl 
of Sofia, the Bulgarian Revolutionary ' Committee is a| 
genuine Macedonian organisation. 

The Servians have a respectable historical and efhno-l 
gr^hical claim to be reckoned a Macedonian race, however) 
weak their political position may be. With the Greeks] 
matters are reversed. The l^end that Macedonia is a 
Greek (nrovince like Crete and Cyprus, a true limb of 
Heiias Irredetnpiat is firmly planted in the European, and 
especially in the English, mind. Lord Salisbury advanced 



Digitized by Google 



I 



io6 MAC£DONIA 

thib curious argument in the crudest form against the 
Treaty of San Stefano. It keeps its hold in the West 
no doubt because the Greeks are well known through 
their commercial colonics and their romantic hibtoiy, while ; 
the Bulgarians are a purely loc d race which has no roots ' 
beyond the Ea-t. And yet it is a sheer iictiou and a trifling 
With words. Tlic Greeks are not a Macedonian race, though 
they have a powLrtnl Church and a considerable party in 
Macedonia. If one takes the linguistic test there are prac- 
tically no villages in European Turkey whose mother-tongue 
is Greek, save along the coasts of the .Egean and the Black 
Sea, in the peninsulas of Chalcidice, and the Thracian 
Chersonnese, and in the extreme south of Macedonia near 
the Thessalian frontier.' They have a large population in 
Salonica and Constantinople, but Salonica is nevertheless 
predominantly a Jewish town, while Constantinople is 
hopelessly cosmopolitan. Historically their claims are no 
better. The Byzantine Empire had no footini^ in the 
interior of Macedonia after it had ceased to be Roman and 
international, and had become patriotic and Greek. The 
Greek claim rests mainly upon this, that there is still a large 
faction of the Macedonian population which, either from 
fear, from superstition, or from preference, remains within 
the "Greek" Orthodox (i.e., the Patnarchist) Church. 
These people are Vlachs, Albanians, Serbs, or other Slavs 
of uncertain origin, but they are no more Greeks than the 
Orthodox Russians are. But the growth of Greek influence 
is none the less a curious study. It depended almost entirely 
upon the Church, and it must have been immeasurably 
stronger in the Balkan peninsula after the coming of the 
Turks than it ever was before. It embraced not merely .i 
Macedonia, but Roumama, Bulgaria, and even Servia as 
well. The few Slavs in the intericMr who were educated at 
all were taught to regard themselves as Greeks, and the very 
tradition of their origin was in danger of dying out. Two 
fatal errors alone wrecked what was nothing less than a . i 
scheme for Helleninng the Balkan peninsula. The women 

* These were the only districts ol Maoedooia which joined the 
Greeks in the War of Independenoe— a vei7 sigiiificaot fact* 



Digitized by Google 



THE RACES OF MACEDONIA 107 



were not educated, and for all the Greek schools might do 
every Slav child learned his own despised tongue at his 
mother's knee. The peasants also were neglected. The 
Greeks regarded them with the unmeasured and stupid 
contempt which a quick town-bred people instinctively 
feels for a race of cultivators. They were barbarians, 
beasts of burden, men only **in the catalogue." The 
Greeks denied the rights of men to the Slav peasants and 
refused to accept them as brethren. The consequence was 
that the peasants never quite lost their sense of separation, 
and a certain dim consciousness of nationality remained, 
rooted in injuries and hatred. The nemesis came at the 
beginning of the nineteenth century, when the Greeks, 
rising at last to the height of their national idea, struck 
their great blow for freedom. The flag of Greek inde- 
pendence was first unfurled, not in Greece, but in 
Roumaoia, which had long been ruled by Greek Gover- 
nors appointed by the Turks, and the Greek army found 
itself to its amazement confronted not merely by Turkish 
hordes, but by native Wailachian bands inspired by a 
national patriotism of their own. 

There is no region of the earth where the national idea 
has wrought such havoc or rioted in such wantonness of 
power as in Macedonia. It poisons and secularises religion. 
It sanctions murder, excuses violence, and leaves more 
kindliness between man and beast than between the 
adherents of rival races. In its name peoples have done 
great deeds which liberty should have inspired, and perpe- 
trated oppressions of an iniquity so colossal that only an 
idea could have (n'ompted them. The miseries of ten 
centuries have been its work, and the lace ol the Balkans 
to-day, furrowed with hatreds, callous from long cruelty, 
dull with perpetual suffering, Is its image and memorial. 
One turns from a survey ol these races and their rivalries, 
asking what future of peace and common work there can 
be while the curse of this national idea still teaches men 
that the vital fact in their lives is the tradition, or the 
memory, or the habit of speech which divides them from 
one another. 



Digitized by Google 



io8 MACEDONIA 



NOTE A. (S«e p. 87.} 

In rebtion to the wealth aod density of its population Macedonia is 

well supplied with railways. They were constructed mainly with 
Austrian and German capital, not at all to benefit the natives, but as a 
safe and paving investment. Their legitmiate revenue from trafBc is i 
incmisideraDle, but the interest on the capital tank in them is provided ! 
by a guarantee calculated upon every kilometre constructed. The 
result is that they twist and gyrate to increase their leugth, even when 
they cross a plain. The tithes wnuig irom the peasantry bear the 
burden, and the international control over Turkish finance secures 
punctual payment. There is one line from Salonica to Monaslir which 
it was intended to continue to the Adriatic either by the Ck>rit£a- 
Avlooa, or by the Ochrida-Dorasso poote. Another line connects 
Salonica with Uskub, and runs thence to the Servian frontier, connect- 
ing at Niseh with the main Orient line. A third run^ from Salonica to 
Dedcagatch and Adrianople, providing an overland route to the capital. 
There is also a short junction line t>etween this eastern system and the 
Uskub line, while a branch line on which trains run thrice a week con- ^ 
nects Uskub with Albania, its terminus being Mitrovitza. Setting 
baekshu^ aside, the consideration which induced the Turks to consent 
to the construction of these railways was no doubt their stratefric value. 
The same order of motives makes them obstinately refuse their assent 
to projects for linking up the Macedonian railways with the Bulgarian ^ 
system (via Uskub-Kumanovo-Kustendil) and with the Cireck system 
(rn? Salonica-Veria-Larissa). Apart from military trains, the traffic 
on all these hnes is conhned to one mixed goods and passenger train in 
each direction daily, and even In these trains the passengers are largely 
soldiers and the goods military stores. Of the water-ways little or no 
Use is made. The greater lakes carry some local traffic, but tiie largest ' 
of them arc situated in the least populous and moat di:>turbed regions ' 
of Macedonia. The Vardar is a capricious river which runs broad and 
shallow in summer through the plains of Kossovo and Uskub, while it 
narrows about Kuprili f«.^, the Bridge) and Demirkapou {i.e^, the Iron 
Gate), a rushing torron wnidi sweeps at a tempestnoos pace through 
a narrow and romantic gorge. Notliing, needless to say, has ever been 
attempted to make it navigable. It reaches the sea through several 
months in a vai»t plain of wastes and niarshes, which is of all bights the 
most desolate and depressing. Here in tlie old days, with Peila as its 
capital, was the scat of the Macedonian Empire. To-day, for the want 
of a few trenches and canals, it is abandoned to the storks and the 
bitterns. For the rest, the main traffic of Macedonia is still performed 
by carriers, mainly Vlach by race, who convey their merchandise on 
pack-horses over mountain tracks with comparative disregard of the 
roads. There arc a few roads which were designed as macadamised 
eloifsste. They preserve their character for a few miles outside the 
town frnm whicii they start, and resume it again within sight of their 
destination, in the interval they are broad tracks ctf unsophisticated 
earth, varied by broken bridges, which usually serve to indicate the . 
whereabouts of a ford. The better of these roads are sometimes used "> 
by wheeled traffic — lumbering waggons of primitive structure, drawn 
by black buffaloes. The drivers ot these, for some odd reason, arc 
usually Moslems, and their chief art consists of keeping the spines of 
their bufialoes cool by irrigating them at frequent intmUs mOn toqg 



J 

Digitized by Google 



THE RAC£S OF MACEDONIA 109 



ladles, which they dip into every passing pool. In winter wheeled 
trafiic is ^Idom possiole, and the trade of the Moslem buffalo-drivers 
passes into the hands of the Christian Vlachs — and their art appears 
to lie chiefly in so placing their wooden pack-saddle?? as to make a fresh 
raw sore at each journey. If the beausts ol Macedonia could be polled 
thfljivoaid certainly not vote for the tatpMsm of the Tnrks. 

NOTE B. (See p. 91X) 

The phyaical conformation of Western Macedonia snmsis a vast 

series of saucer-like basins, sometimes lakes, sometimes broad plains 
surrounded by mountains which are more or less continuous spurs and 
oMoots from the Phidiis range. Eastern Macedonia, on the other 
hand, can be considered ratlier as two great valleys watered by the 
Vardar and the Struma. Three of the Western lakes are of consider- 
able size and depth — Ochrida, Picbba, .lud Ostrovo. Ochrida is 
nndoofatedly one of the most beautiful — so far as my experience 
goes, quite the most beautiful — of the lakes of Europe. The mountains 
which surround it are lofty, rugged, and unbroken. Their outlines are 
not swathed in trees, and for the greater part of the 3irear they are 
snow-clad. There is httle verdure, but the climate provides the most 
various effects of purple, blue, and sandy-red. Castoria is a smaller 
lake, but it would be difficult to exaggerate its romantic beauty, set, as 
it is, among hills and mountains, miich lend themselves to endless 
illusions and surprises. There are also two smaller lakes near 
Sorovitcb. The great phun of Pelagonia, on the edge of which at 
the month of passes the towns of Monastir and Fiorina are situated, 
seems as though it might once have been a lake. But, ind^sd, it may 
rather have been the plains which became lakes. Ostrovo, for example, 
is of comparatively recent ori^n, and a submerged village can still be 
seen under its dark waters. Kbssovo is the largest plam of all, and 
Uskub stands, as it were, on a rocky l-!c t in the centre of another great 
depression. The climate of Macedonia is very various. Salonica is a 
typical Mediterranean town. Ochrida, high though it is, enjoys a 
balmy air and a genial winter, while Resna, not much hig|Mr and 
only six hours' ride to the east, is bitterly cold at Christmas. The 
plams, if they are exposed to the winds from the north-east, are often 
colder than me mountains. The atmosphere lacks the dazzling clear- 
ness of Greece, and mists are common round Monastir and Uskub. 
Malarial fever is a terrible scourge in the marshy districts at the Vardar 
mouths, and also in the low-lying and undrained plains aroond Drama 
and Kavalla. The upper Struma valley, on the other hand. Ins a 
rigorous highland climate. The products and the soil are as diverse 
as the climate. Spring begins in some regions in early February, in 
others towards Apnl. The smnmer to e very wh ete torrid, but tm h eal th y 
only in the marshy plains. 

NOTE C (See p. loa) 

^ Afte r writing the above passafjc I met with this interesting confirma- 

tion in an essav by the Bulgarian poet, Pencho Slaveikoff, prefixed to 
*«The Shade of the Balkans^ (David Nutt, 1003) :— 

" Our folk-songs do not go back beyond the frontier of the four* 
teenth century, that is» they do not record faistorio events of an earlier 



\ 

I 



Digitized by Google 



I 



I lo MACEDONIA 

dale. 1 lie fact is very remarkable and significant. Hcro-sougs or 
apic-aoiigft (as they are also called) csui (Mtly oe faaitioiied by a people 
which has national self-conscionsncss, and that is just what our ancestors 
ia the days of the free Bulgarian monarchy did not possess. We have, 
ia lac^tD wait till the nineteenth century l>efore that radiant sun breaks 
tbroi^ ; before the bouns go whirling through our veins we liatve five 
hundred years of slavery, what the world had not shown us we found 
in a prison. The sole occupation of ail those great kings of ours was 
to enliven their people, and instead of fostering the national energies, 
frantically squandered them in many a vain heroic progress, now to 
Byzantium, now tp Dyrrachium. But for their people they made no 
progress, so these have taken a ruthless vengeance, and have not 
dammed the waves of oblivion. They have preserved for us in thdr 
song the names of several nreliistonc beasts^ bat not of one solitary 
king." 

NOTE D. (See p. Z04.) 

It is a dangerous thing to generalise about physical types from 

impressions which one forms in travelling. But the impression of 
I^ystcal grace which one gains in Belgrade is irresistible. The women 
are not striking, bat the men— for example, the too numerous officers ' 
are notably taU, well-built in a lithe way, and frequently handsome in 
feature. In Sofia, on the other hand, physical beauty is depressingly 
rare. The officers are shorter, stouter, and altogether less pretentious 
tban in Servia. Even the children seem, on tot wlioie» latber ugly. 
Bot strong, stordy, and eodnriog the Bnlgariana oertalaly are. 



Digitized by Qoo 



i 



CHAPTER V 

TU£ BULGARIAN llOV£ii£NT 
TRAVELLER'S first impressions of the Bulgarians of 



^ Macedonia are rarely favourable. It is a race with 
few external attractions ; and it seldom troubles to sue for 
sympathy, or assist the process of mutual understanding. 
It is neitiier hospitable nor articulate. The Slav peasant 
has no passwords to the foreigner's heart. He cannot 
point, like the Greek, to a great past; he cannot boast 
that his forbears have been yonr tutors in civilisation. He 
leaves you to form what opinion of him you please, and 
shows himself only in the drab of his daily costume of 
commonplace. He will not call on you unbidden at your 
hotel, or invite you to his schools, or insist that you shall 
visit his churches. And, perforce, you study him from the 
outside. You find him dull, reserved, and unfriendly, for 
ezperience has taught him to see in every member of an 
atien race a probable enemy* He lacks the plauaibihty, the 
grace, the quick intelligence of the Greek. He has nothing 
of the dignified courtesy, the defiant independence, the 
mediaeval chivalry of the Albanian. Nor has he physical 
graces to recommend him ; and even the women are un- 
prepossessing. He has no sense for externals, no instinct 
for di^lay. If he is wealthy he hoards his wealth. If he 
is poor he lives in squalor and in dirt. His national 
costumes are rarely picturesque his national dances mono- 
tonous, his national songs unmusical. You may learn to 
respect his industry, his vast capacity for uninteresting 
work ; but it is all the toil of the labourer, and the spirit of 
the artist and the craftsman is not in him. He erects 




Digitized by Google 



112 



MACEDONIA 



against yoo a bulwark of deceit. He treats your every 
question as a snare into which he refuses to enter. Either 
he answers with feigned stupidity and an assomptton of 
ignorancei or else he seeks to divine the response you 
expect, and proceeds forthwith to give it to you with no 
thought of its relation to the truth. It is not exactly lying 
as we understand it. Rather the peasant has no conception 
of a frank relationship with any superior. He has been 
demoralised by dealing with masters who are childish and 
capricious as well as tyrannical. His vices are the mean 
habits of the down-trodden, and if in any capacity you 
have need of courage or honesty or fidelityi it is the 
Albanian and not the Bulgarian whom you will employ. 
You may learn to view these laults in a true lustorical 
perspective. You may bring yourself to think of them 
rather as the shameful evidence of the conqueror's wrong- 
doing than any proof of original depravity in the conquered. 
Hie more you learn tiie more you will incline to a kindly 
pity, but at the first you are hardly likely to admire this 
stolid and unprepossessing race. Time and accident alone 
bring the clue to a different reading of its character.' 

It came to me by chance in the silent streets of Mace- 
donian towns^this occult and difficult due. One hears in 
them neither music nor laughter. The peasant trudges 
silently In, his wife some paces behind htm, and speaks 
only to chafiSer at the tsazaar. The townsman is too busy in 
dodging spies and stepping over dogB to break the melan- 
choly silence. And yet, as the winter went on, a plaintive 
melody b^an to detach itself from the dull background of 
depression. I hardly heeded it until one evening I heard it 
at the fireside of a Bulgarian house. I can think of nothing 
in my experience more homely, more complacent, more 
comfortable than that family cirde with tiie plain daughters, 
the shy son, and the faA, parents in undress. It was an 
atmo^here of crude materialism, and nothing seemed more 

' Another reason why the Bulgarians '^f Macedonia seem so un- 
attractive is that all their best men are exiles m free Bulgaria, There 
ib no educated class left to leaven the restj or to represeut tiic aation to 
the traveller. 



Digitized by Google 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 113 



distant than ideas^ more remote than revolution. And then, 
suddenly, th^ sang it, the plaintive air ol the streets. It 
brought a fire to ti^etr eyes, a resonance to their voices^ a 
blush to their phlegmatic cheeks. It was a song of revolt 
It summoned the young men to the hills, chid the old 
laggards who ''sit in celebrated one l>y one the 

chiefs who had fought and died in the autumn, and pro- 
phesied a future ol freedom. From that evening onward 
the air was always in my ears. Sometimes it was a school- 
boy who whistled it in the streets ; sometimes a group of 
young men who chanted it, with all its daring words, within 
earshot of a Turkish sentiy. It mingled with the tread of 
armed patrols and the nimble of ammunition carts. It 
challenged the night-watchman, and insulted the Pasha's 
carriage. Let the Turks be never so busy with their ostentap 
tious precautions, their endless mobilisation against the 
coming campaign, this song of defiance was always in the 
air, mocking their dull wits and thdr useless preparations. 
They neither heard nor understood, foreigners that they are 
in their own country. It played about their ears unheeded, 
like a song of doom, sung by the land itself. And here at 
length was the real rhythm of the Bulg^urian heart. Hence- 
forward the lies and the silences mattered little. One could 
overhear this inarticulate people talking to itself. I was 
amid a race that was org^ising itself for freedom. It leads 
a double life, caring little for tilie ugly, unimportant present 
in which it suffers, intrigues and compromises, postponing 
its greater qualities for the future it has resolved to conquer. 

The insurgent movement is in reality a genuine Mace- 
donian movement^ prepared by Macedonians, led by 
Macedonians, and assisted by the passionate sympathy of 
the vast majority of the Slav population. There is hardly a 
village that has not joined the organisation. In the larger 
towns, like Monastir, there are few in^vidual Bulgarians 
who are not active and willing members. Ten and twenty 
years ago the children in Macedonian schools, trained to 
render the Sultan's hymn for the benefit of official visitors, 
were tau^t in secret a pathetic song, ''to the honour of 
him, whosoever he may be, who shall be our liberator," 
I 



Digitized by Google 



"4 



MACEDONIA 



To-day that song has given place to ballads of adiievemeot 
which tell how Deicheff or SYetkoff gave their lives in opm 
fight lor aa unfurled banner. 

» * • « ♦ 

The Treaty ol San Stefano, which closed the Russo- 
TurJdah war, brought a momentary and elusive hope of 
liberty to Macedonia. If we could but dismiss the habits 
of thou^t ol twenty years, see the map of the Balkans 
without the artificial lines whidi diplomacy has traced 
upon ity and think away the political suggestions co n veyed 
in such purely geographical terms as ^Bulgaria" and 
" Macedonia," there is no reason in histoiy or in the nature 
ol things, why these two r^ions should have been subjected 
to such different fotes. In both, the population is predomi- 
nantly Slavonic^ and in both there is a minority ol Turks 
and Greeks. Both took up arms to oo-operate with the 
liberating Russian invader. Both had revolted from flie 
Greek form of Orthodoxy and Iredy joined the Bulgarian 
Exarchist Church. When the Berlin Congress, influenced 
by the dread which England entertained ol creating a great 
Bulgaria that might have been a powerlul ally ol Russia^ 
ordained that Bulgaria should be Ireed, while Macedonia 
should return to Turkish rule, a reckless despair seised the 
abandoned population which had just seen its liberties won 
by blood and ratified by treaty. Their first instinct was one 
^/*6I protest Two districts ol the Struma valky rose in arms, 
, seised the passes, and lor some days defied the Turkish 
I troops. At Odirida a more ambitious conspiracy waa 
I remled to the authorities before it had ripened. Rispres- 
' sions followed, but Europe had given its decision ; and for 
■ more than a decade tiie Slavs ol Macedonia endured their 
I late with what sullen patience they could command, 
I cherishing the hope that Russia mig|it some day enlorce 
\ in earnest the generous programme of San Stefano. It was 
I a period of much suffering, in which progress was slow and 
I painful. The Greeks were active and hostilei persecuting any 
I teacher who dared to propagate the Bulgarian language, and 
I opposing the extension ol the ^'schismatic" Bulgarian Church 
{with the lamiliar weapons ol bribery and denunciation. 



Digitized by Google 

J 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 115 

But for all these obstacles the Bulgarian movement 
steadily advanced. The policy of the Exarchist Church 
was patient and cautious. It aimed at solving the problem 
not by revolution but by a slow process of education 
and consolidation. The schools were its most effective 
machinery. They trained a generation which could not 
be contented with servitude under an Asiatic tyranny, and 
the young men who had graduated in the secondary 
colleges at Monastir, Uskub, and Salonica felt themselves 
the equals of the Greeks. For Bulgaria (to which Eastern 
Roumelia was soon added) exercised an irresistible attraction 
over the imagination of the Macedonian Slavs as they 
watched first her victory over Servia and then her rapid 
material progress. There came a time when the younger 
generation felt that the methods of the priest and the 
schoolmaster were too slow, that they had achieved as 
much by peaceful propaganda as they could hope to gain, 
and that their ultimate liberation could come only from 
an armed movement which would compel the intervention 
of Europe. There were precedents enough to support 
their reasoning. It was in 1893 that a group QLillflufiiilial 
Macedonian Buljgarians, who held these views, met together 
in a certairTTiouse in Resna, and founded the " Internal 
Organisation." Two of these men are still the leaders of 
the movement — Damian Grpueff, a teacher in Salonica 
who abandoned_an assured career and a comfortable income 
to become an outlaw and. _ a conspirator, and Christo 
Tatarcheff, formerly a doctor in Salonica, whose polished 
manners and knowledge of the world have made him the 
diplomat of the Committee, delegated to direct its activities 
in Sofia. It is characteristic of the Bulgarian character 
that the^ Committee .laid its plans not for an immediate 
insurrection, which must have failed, but for a long period 
of organisation and preparation. The aspiration for liberty 
fexisted. The tradition of resistance spoke through the 
ballads that told of the achievements of the Heiducks — 
the robber patriots of the Balkans. The stupidest peasant 
sighed for a life of quiet and the departure of the Turks. 
But the means, the courage, the iostinct for mutual help, had 



Digitized by Google 



ii6 



MACEDONIA 



first to be trained. The leaders had to inspire the peasants 
with the same courage and faitii which flie schools of the 
Exarchate had already created in the minds of the educated 
class. They had to weld the isolated Macedonian villages, 
which regard the districts beyond their own valley as a 
foreign land, into a conscious nation, A whole tradition 
of servitude had first to be combated, and to men who 
cowered at the sight of a Turk^ and submitted without 
protest to the cudgel and the bastinado, it was necessary 
to preach the ri^t of revolt and the duty of resistance. 
^ Better an end with horrors tiian horrors without an end," 
was the epigram in ndiich Groueff summed up the teaching 
of the Committeei and it sank deeply into the mind of 
Macedonia. Funds had to.hft acciimnlatH for the, ftVffntnal 
conflict, lead ers ch osen^ and the young men .inured to 
obedience and to disciplioje, rifles smuggled into the 
country, and men trained to use. them. Finally, there 
was opposition to be isiced from the hierarchy of the 
Bulgarian Church, who feared that this dangerous organisa- 
tion must compromise their slow and legal work, while 
even within the villages, the wealthier peasants, accustomed 
to regard themselves as the delegates of the Turkish 
authorities, were usually timid and sometimes hostile.* In 
this way the movement became democratic as well as 
revolutionary. The Bulgars are not a speculative race. 
I have never met even among their leaders the type of 
thinker and theorist whom one encounters so often among 

* The structure of rural society in the village communiucs is decidedly 
plutocratic. Certain powers are vested in a committee of elders 
fjisas), with a salaried headman {Uwdjabashi or Mouktar) at their head. 
They are in a general way responsible to the Turks for ail that happens 
in the village. Their consent is necesrary if the place is to chai^ its 
" religion" — i.e., to become Greek or Bulgarian. They prepare the lists 
for taxation, and their seals are necesiiary for passports. Their authority 
is therelure considerable, and they have it in their power to exercise 
a good deal of petty oppression and to nuUce their little harvests of 
corruption. They arc rmt necessarily or ;-.<ii:illv $he natural leaders 
of a village. There is for the office of elder or headnian a property 
qualification* based on the amount ci real «tate which each peasant 
owns, and the asas form accc»-dingly a little coterie of the relatively 
wealthy and comiortable men in every village, the " haves whom the 
Turks thougiit they could trust to manage the have-nots." 



Digitized by 



THE BULGARIAN MOViiMENT 117 



Riissian eziks— perhaps they are hardly as yet at that level 
ol cntture. But in a practical and quite clear-sighted way 
they did become a real people's party. Their decisions 
are taken by general conferences, which contrive in some 
mysterious way to meet once or twice a year in the very 
heart of Macedonia. Their leaders are elected, from the 
president of the whole organisation down to the chiefs 
of each village band. They have known how to bend the 
Bishops to their will, and in the corrupt little world of 
the village communities, where the wealthier peasants rule 
with the support of the Turks, they have fostered :i very 
wholesome spirit of criticism and opposition. Year by 
year the Committee became more and more a i^Lnuitiely 
national ort^amsation. it knew how to use ciuhusiasiu 
and to inspire the youn^. It had its songs and its heroes. 
At Uskub the lad-, in the upper classes oi the secondary 
school have been known to march through the streets 
of the town under the cvcs of the Turkb, cliunting their 
ballads of revolt for cill to hear. But this reckless spirit 
of youth and self-sacrifice was Rinded by older heads. The 
organisation included the cautious peasant W'ith his habit 
of compromise and guile, the WL-althy merchant of the 
towns, and the educated professiona.1 man, as well as these 
younger and lioitcr heads. Discipline and organisation 
were its chief ends for many a long year of waiting, and 
patience amid taliacious hopes and aLuiiung persecutions 
was its typical virtue. Enthusiasm it possessed, like all 
revolutionary movements, but its passion for method and 
detail were even more remarkable. It had its correspondents 
in every 'Centre, its couriers, its treasurers, its experts for 
explosives, its medical service, its hired agents among the 
Turks, its archives, and its official records." There is a 
Macedonian fable which tells how the several races of 
Turkey came to God for gifts. The Turks came first and 

* See for an embodiment of its spirit the very competent report 
published in November, 1904, at Soiia in French, Lm Macedoine cl Ic 
vilayet dAdrinoble (1893-1903), a rea>rd remarkable for its method. 



but there SO little eiaggentioa that it forms a valuablo historical 
docume&t. 




Digitized by Google 



iiS MACEDONIA 

received the boon of sovereignty. The Greeks, hearing 
what had happened, hurried to heaven and complained, 
** O God ! What is this intrigue of yours against us ? Give 
us also power." And God answered, " Sovereignty is 
already allotted. But yon shall have the gift of intrigue." 
Then came the Bul^^ars with the same petitujn, " O God 1 
What is this work oi yours ? Give us also power." But 
God gave them the gift of work. 

Whjle the C ommittee w aa a secret society within the 
borders of NIacedpnia, in free Bulgaria it established itself 
openfy as a political organisation. There is in Bulgaria 
an immense population of Macedonian origin which has 
taken root in the principality. It numbers perhaps as many 
as two imndred thousand person-, and it forms half the popu- 
lation of Sofia. These Macedonwin emigrants are naturally 
the elect of their race, the men whose enterprise and educa- 
tion made life under Turkish conditions intolerable to 
them. Some fled at various epochs to escape persecution 
in Turkey, others who had come to Bulgaria for education, 
found that there was no career open to them in their native 
places, others attain are migratory labourers who discovered 
that they could make a better income in Bulgaria than at 
home, in addition to this perm merit Macedonian colony in 
Bulgaria, there are the wandering immigrants, carpenters, 
masons, and harvesters, wlio come to spend a few months or 
a few years in quest of work and wages. The Committee 
naturally made the mpst_of the 0|4i0i"tnnities which it 
possessed in Bulgaria. It found Macedoaiaiis in ev^y 
service and profession — othcers, priests, journalists, diplo- 
matists, teachers, and even university professors. It formed 
branches of its organisation among them. It made the 
Macedonian question the chief political issue in Bulgaria. 
It has its newspapers, its deputies in the chambers, and 
there have even been ministers of Macedonian origin. It 
holds mass meetings openly and presses its claims at every 
election. These Macedonians, mainly mea-oi-CQm pa rative 
wealth, were all expected to contribute to its funds, and 
when money enough could not be obtained by voluntary 
sttbscriptton, it did not shrink from menace and violence. 



Digitized by Google 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 119 



l it armed its active parti san*;, and drilled thgm openly. Jn 

t he mount ai^ffoa gnnntlT ^ **** ntilywaw «d» rrf ^HijD 

Macedonian frontier it formyct l^.%t(^.Qf sunmnnitio^^ and 
massed 'AiT bands whi<± were destin^. tp. in^e Turkey 
from' time t(i.tUBfi> either to conduct i ts propagan da or to 
wage a gaffliHa ^-fa-^ ajpi^f Atm TwrW It became an 
exce edingly dangerous State within the State, and more 
^K«t*p>^^o /»orr.« t|a^j- invnlving ^"'5^"^ ^♦^^ h#>r 

nnghboprs. But on the whole Dy l^lig? opinion in Buli^aria. 
which'coqld not be indifiereot to the fate of Bulgarians 
over the border, waa nHi fc it. Sncoessiim Governments 
dtfiered in their attitude^ but those which had tiie will to 
suppress it dared taiw no efeetive measures, while those 
which heartily sympathised were restrained by fear of the 
diplomatic consequences. Its leaders wer e_occasionaliy 
placed under tempcwrary arres t, its bandsj were som etimes 
barassea . mO-attadosilifi^thfi^ J^ss^ (he Jfrontier/ its 
CMTg^misation was even. .Jiiiiaaibed_ja^-diaa0lved« But 
against its determination , its numbers, and the approval of 
popular sentiment hq .gulgariaa GQY6rRnx<^..€ou)djiall^ 
dMtrpx it When Saraf off was condemned to death by the 
Koumaniaa courts for or^ganising a series of inexcusable 
murders in Roumanian territory, he enjoyed immunity in 
Bulgaria itself. When the Turks actiially presented an 
nltimatmn to the Bulgarian Government after the dynamite 
outrages at Salonica, the Committee^ though somewhat 
restricted in its movements and frowned upon in official 
circles, none the less survived. It could not indeed be 
otherwise. Every man of middle age in Bul|g|ria remembers 
what it incAns to live^under the^Turkish yoke. Thfi^^^ce- 
d onians arf } th^''" j|pH their npi^hh^nrs^ and if they 

should wish to shut their eyes and repress their sympathies 
tiiey are constantly met by the sight ot the broken refugees 
of Tteldab oppression^ who crowd over the frontier in times 
of crisis and tell their tale of suffering in the common tongue. 
The ties of blood are no weaker in Bulgaria than elsewhere. 
There are differences of opinion in Bulg^uia as to the best 
means of helping Macedonia. The parties which still draw 
their political in^iration from the late M. Stambuloff, 



Digitized by Google 



I20 



MACEDONIA 



fearing that any caAastrophe in the Balkans must give 
Russia an opportunity to interfere with no dimnterested 
motive^ urge patience and an understanding with Turkey. 
They make their appeal to Western Europe and renounce 
' the idea of an active Bulgarian intervention. But in times 
of stress the natural instinct of the average man in Bulgaria 
calls loudly for war. I have never met a Bulgarian who pro* 
fessed to believe that Bulg^ could vanquish Ttvkey, but 
in the army the opinion that the early stages of a campaign 
would be fovourabie is very general, and it is assumed that 
before Turkey could recover from her first reverses the 
Great Powers would step in. Apart from these calculations, 
the feeling that Bulgaria has endured enough, spent enough, 
submitted too long to this nightmare at her gates is very 
common even among the pacific mercantile class. War, if 
it brought any permanent solution, would be a relief, what- 
ever it might cost for the moment in blood and tieasure. 
In this state of mind the Macedonian Committee' possesses 
a powerful ally. 

Important as the activities of the Macedonian Committee 
have been and may again be in Bulgaria, they have never 
gone so far as to compromise the genuine Macedonian 
character of the movement It had its -origin not in Sofia, 
but in the little country town of Resna. It is led not by 
Bulgarians but by Macedonians. The Bulg :irian Govern- 
ment is naturally able to influence its policy — ^it must take 
account of all the diplomatic factors in its problem — ^but 
as much could be said of the European Powers whose 
attitude it watches closely. It has never, 1 thinly surren- 
dered its independence to any external pressure. Indeed, 
there is a strong current of opinion among the leaders of 
the Macedonian movement which tends to be critical of, and 
occasionally almost hostile to, Bulgaria. The younger 
generation of educated Macedonian Bulgars is pr^oundly 
distrustful of Russia, whose ambition it dreads more than 
the decaying power of Turkey. These men can never fed 
quite sure of Bulgaria, where sentiment suid intrigue and 
the proximity of tiie Black Sea fleet make Russian influence 

' See note at end of chapter. 



Digitized by 



1 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 121 

powerful It is true that the Stambulofist parties in 
Bulgaria are at heart anti^Russiaii, but they can rarely afford 
in office to give rein to the principles which they profess in 
opposition* ** No Government in Bulgaria is anti-Russian/' 
as a Russian diplomatist once remarked to me. ^ There are 
only degrees of Russophilism." The Macedonians, on the 
other handy have their outlook on the iSgean, and they are 
not at all anxious to link their fortunes with those of a 
principality whose ports lie exposed to the Russian navy. 

It is true that without the friendly refuge of Bulgaria the 
Macedonian patriots could have achiev^ little. But the 
fact that their bands are often equipped in Bulgaria, and 
sometimes led by Macedonians long resident in Bulgaria, in 
no way robs die Committee of its looil character. The Greek 
and Servian movements in Macedonia are, on the other 
hand, the creation of the Greek and Servian Governments, 
and they are directed, with very little disguise, from the 
Greek and Servian consulates. The unique feature of the 
Bulgarian Committee is that it is a democratic organisation, 
whose policy and programme are dictated by Macedonian 
opinion. 

In its original idea I am ready to believe that the Mace- 
donian Committee had no exclusive racial ambition. Its 
leaders were Bulgarians by race and language, but their 
programme has never been the annexation of Macedonia to 
Bulgaria, and I see no reason to doubt their sincerity when 
they say that their aim was to create a free neutral State 
under the suzerainty of the Sultan, in which all the races of 
their distracted country might meet on a footing of equality, 
and conduct their common affairs without regard to national 
ambitions. They were not at first on the best of terms 
with the hierarchy of the Bulgarian Church, nor did they 
entirely trust the Bulgaria across the border. The Slavs of 
European riirkty have even yet no highly-developed con- 
sciuubiicbs of race, and what litllc llicy [>ossess is of recent 
growth. Their passion is not for their race but for their 
country. They are a people ot the soil fixed 111 their 
immemorial viHat^cs, with a limited ranL;L' of sentmu^nts 
which play piuusiy aiound their mQuntaiii:», tlicu rivers aiid 



Digitized by Google 



122 



MACEDONIA 



tiieir ancient churdiM. A nation of peasants which starts 
with these conservative qualities will reaidily develop agenuine 
local patriotisaL And this indeed has happened despite 
adverse circumstances. Their ballads of revolt in which the 
word " Macedonia" recurs in eveiry choni% prove that they 
have aheady a btherland. II the other races of Macedonia 
had started with the same Sfuritnal equipment a joint move- 
ment of revolt would have been feasible^ and from this oo* 
operation a genuine Macedonian Commonwealth would have 
evolved quite naturally, Macedonia is little more chaotic in 
its races and langoaces 'than Switserland. But the other 
Macedonian stocks are not peoples of the soiL The Al* 
banians are recent invaders. The Vlachs are nomad herda* 
men, wandering carriers and cosmopolitan merchaiits, whose 
families are scattered all over the Levant The Greeks are 
townsmen, reared on abstractions, who care nothing for the 
soil of Macedonia, and vecy much indeed for HeUenisnu" 
They are, moreover, an aristocracy of talent, whose chief 
intsrest is the Churdi they govern, and they have ingrained 
an Imperial tradition which knows nothing ol local patrio- 
tism. To the Slav, Macedonia is simply so much land 
which his ancestors have tilled for twelve centuries. To the 
Greek it means the country ol Alexander and the hearth ol 
a great Empire. Their Great Idea demands the extension 
of the little modern kingdom of Greece to Constantinople 
and the Straits^ and Macedonia is essential to that ambition, 
because through it lies the road to the sentimental capital 
of Hellenism, which is not the Athens of Pericles but the 
Bysantium ol Constantine. In the Macedonian insurgents 
they refuse to see peasants fighting for a minimum of hberty. 
To their romantic imagination these simple rebels of the 
villages are the vanguard of the Sbtv hosts, the hired agents 
of Russia and Panslavism, an army which is alnsady 
attempting to occupy the road to Constantinople and to bar 
the advance of H^enism* That is, of course^ the extreme 
Athenian view. But Athens dominates the Greeks of 
Macedonia, and they follow their Bishops and their consuls 
with a docility which is destructive of any local opinion. 
Left to themselvefl^ tfap Macedonian Greeks would probably 



Digitized by 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 123 

have come to tenm viifa their Slav neighbcnm long ago. 
But just because they are the weaker dement in Maoedonia 
they do not wish to be left to themselTes. It would have 
needed much grace to forget the secular feud, to renounoB 
the inborn contempt ol the barbarian^ and to pardon the 
crime of the Exarchist schism. This grace the Greeks do 
not possess, and the Bul^uians were not sufficiently 
patient and tactful in their efforts at conciliation. Certainly 
the two peoples have never found common ground. To the 
Greeks who have the consdonsness of race in an ezfaava- 
gent form, and to whom their language and their culture is 
dearer even than liberty, the ideal of a neufa^ Macedonian 
commonwealth presented no attractions. As little was it 
possible to come to terms with a view to a partition of the 
country, and a delimitation of spheres of influence. The 
inevitable result of the hostility of the Greeks was that the 
Macedonian movement became more and more definitely 
nationalist, until to-day it is as deddedly anti-Greek as it ia 
anti-Turk. All attempts at co-operation and conciliation 
have long since been abandoned. 

The Committee still uses in its official documents 
language which implies that the basis of its propaganda 
is not racial, and that it does not aim at a Bulgarian 
ascendancy. But these, I am afraid, are no more than 
pious memories of a better state of mind. The atmo- 
sphere of Macedonia is so poisoned with nationalism that 
the most enlightened patriot becomes corrupted against his 
will. And yet, with all these reservations, it reiiiu.ins true 
that the Committee does not dc^iic the cinncx:iti<3n of Mace- 
donia to }3ulgaria, that its ideal, in form at least, \s btill an 
international commonwealth, and that it gives proof of its 
sincerity by asking Europe fur a Euiopean Governor. This 
seems to me an importaiit point, for if the secret intention 
of the Macedonian Ijuii^ars was to obtain autoniJinv as 
Eastern Kouincha did, merely as a prciiiniuary to a coup 
d'etat and a sudden annexation to Bulgaria, they would ask 
not fora European Govcraor, but tor some native Christian, 
who could easily be removed. Indeed, I believe that so 
far as the Bulgarian^i wliether in Macedonia or in Bulgaria, 



Digitized by Google 



124 



MACEDONIA 



speculate about the remote future at all^ their dream is that 
Macedonia should be certainly a Slav, but not definitely a 
Bulgarian, country, and that it should eventually form the 
central state in a Balkan federation which might unite all 
the Southern SbvsJ A big Bulgaria which included Mace- 
donia would be so overwhelmingly powerful that Servia 
and Monten^ro would shrink from joining her. A neutral 
Macedonia, on the odier hand, would be a point of union 
which miglit conciliate the jarring interests of Servta and 
Bulgaria, since to l>oth it would offer access to the iGgean, 
a new commercial outlet, and a fresh window to the 
world* 

• • • • # 

During the earlier years of its existence ihe. " T nffgnal 
Organisation " was a cooyjaiiaUyfily peaceful and incon- 
spicuous society. It was occupied mainly with its moral 
propaganda — in preaching the doctrine of revolt, in found- 
ing on its spiritual side the idea of a Macedonian fatherland. 
It also busied itself jvith th^ iask .of , arm 
younger men in the villages, but as yet the moment for 
raising the flag of rebeUion was sufficiently distant. But 
little by little a variety of circumstances hardly foreseen in 
its plan of campaign drove it to more violent and ques- 
tionable methods. Its activities, in a couiit:y wIicil; the 
Greeks are always ready to bcrvc ab the spicb ut the Turks, 
could not remain a complete secret ; and as one leader after 
another fell uuder the buspicion of thL- authorities, .these 
. marked men beeaiiic bv force of cu cumstances outlaws 
i who were compelled tu "take to the momuains," ritie in 
j hand, a[id to live the restless, hunted lite of the traditional 
brigand-patriots of the Balkans. Such men fjathered ljttle 
bands ol desperate spirits about them, and naturally^ served 
as the police and the pioneers of the movement. They had 
nothing to fear save capture, antias l ong as they cou ld 

■ The Committee, or some sections of it, even contemplates (1905) 
the policy of imposing the Macedonian Slav dialect in place of literary 
Bulgarian as tlic language of all the Kxrirchist schools in Maccrlonia. 
Grammars are said to have been printed for this purpose. This seems 
to me to prove the sfaioerity of the local aotonomist j^iotism. 



Digitized by 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 125 



escape a Turkish pri son b y their qw q wits and tlie loyali 
connivance of the sympathetic peas ants, they were free to I 
do the work of the Committee without much fear o f con- 
sequences. In the anarchical interior, where the Turk is 
IbrH" only of the towns, the high-roads, and the dayHght, 
they could move freely over the mountain paths, and the 
remoter villages were a cumpaia.Livcly safe refuge. Their 
task was to preach rebellion, to inspire the young men with 
a passion for liberty and brave deeds, to punish traitors, to 
overa we the Gr t:Lib>r collect or to extort the funds which 
were to purchase arms, to exact vengeance upon individual j 
Turks, and to train up a generation with some faith in its 
own right arm. As thejears went on an elaborate military 
organisation gradually came into being. The country wasj 
mapped out into military zones, in each.jof which a per-- 
manent outlaw band led by a trusted leader was always 
under arms. It might number only from ten to twenty j 
men, but these cadres were constantly changed and renewed, i 
so that all the promising young men. were expected to 
undergo, as it were, a pexipd Qf^iraining. Latterly when 

.V such a band found itself hard_pressed, it summoned the 

"reserves" from the villages. The reserve was divided 
into several classes according to age, but this refinement 
existed, I fancy, only on paper, for the simple reason that 
there were never rifie^ enough for more than the younger j 
men. Every family was ex pect ed to contribute one! 
member to the reserve. He had to buy a rifle, or, if he(. 
were too poor^ some sort of gun was found tor him. Eachji 
village chose its„QWii„o£6.cu , and, as far as circumstances 
allowed, the reberve was driiled in preparation, for tlie 
general rising which formed the end and purpose of all this 
elaborate organisation. In practice, I cannot believe tliat 
this drilling was serious. But a real moral preparation 
there certainly was, and the organisation made willing ) 
recruits, i mbued w ith a spiriLoLseif-sacrilice and a sense of 
discipline, even if it failed to train good marksmen. The 
only reliable troops .the Committee had were the men \ 
who had served in the permanent guerilla bands. The 1 

^. "reservei " however, was by no means lacking in courage; 



I 



Digitized by Google 



I 



1x6 MACEDONIA 

it had the endurance of all laborious peasant races, and to 
convert it into a real patriotic militia nothing was wanting 
but experience and opportunity. Against European troops 
it would, of course, have been useless, but the Turkish 
regulars uadergo no training whatever in musketry. The 
problem was to create a force which, however dchcicnl it 
might be in the qualities of a profession:il soldiery, would 
still have cohesion enough and self-confidence enough to 
face the Turks. It was a moral rather than a niiiitary 
problem. The military results of the insurrection when it 
came at last in the autumn of 1903 were inconsiderable, 
but as a_demonitralion it wa-s undoubtedly tiiiidive. A 
race of serfs, witliout military trsijaiJ3g_xu: traditions, accus- 
tomecTfbr five centuries to oppose nothiQ^j2m^..£JiiUea 
patience to the insults and brutalities Qf_ its JDppiessors, did 
at iength dare_tii_jnfifiL.thfi.-~discipliiifid Jttoops of a con- 
quering race in the field, and to oppose. JtQ_th4;iu» though 
outnumbered in the ratio ol Jten to one, a stubborn if 
unsuccessful resistance. That is the best evidence of the 
fruits of tiie Committee's work and the best justilication for 
its existence. It has not yet won liberty for Macedonia in 
any outward or official form, but it has converted the 
children of slaves into men who are free at heart. 

Accident has pla yed a larg e part in hastening the full 
development of the Committee's plans. Up-lilLUoe year 
i392 the Tuikb seem hardly to have suspected its existence. 
Chance opened their eyes, unmasked the whole conspiracy, 
forced it into the open, and incidentally gave to the 
European world the first hint that a Macedonian question 
; existed. Some raiders from Bulgaria rQbbed a Turkis_h 
i landed proprietor of £Soo in the village of Vinitza, npt far 
' from the Bulgarian frontier, in „tlje_4JrDvince of Uskub. 
During the tortures and perquisitions wliich fallawed,_tiifiL, 
Turkish police came suddenly upon a hidden store of 
dynamite and riries, and further inquiry revealed the work 
which for four years the Committee had been carrying on 
under the eyes of the indolent authorities. ^Fqi... two 
months a veritable reign of terror oppressed the whole 
province oi^Uskub. The seardi for hidden arms was 



Digitized by Google 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 147 



conducted in every Bulgarian 'village^ and the Tark8» seised 
with a madness which sprang partly from panic and partly 
from anger^ indulged in a more than normal cmelty* 
Tortnre and violation were freely used, and it was the 
intellectual leaders of the people— the pnulta, and still more 
the schoolmasters — ^who sufFered most severely. Over five 
hundred partisans of the Committee in the Uskub Vilayet 
were flung into prison, and about three hundred fled to 
Bulgaria. 

It was a severe blow to the Internal Organisation. It 
terrified the peasants, it enormously enhanced the risks of 
propagandkt work, it r em ov ed some of the best leaders of 
the movement, and it gave the signal for a systematic 
persecution of the Bulgarian schools, since it taught the 
Turks that in the education of the peasantry lay the chief 
danger to their rule. Since 1897 every Bulgarian 
teacher has been suspected. Those who had been educ;ited 
in the principality of Bulf;;iria are absolutely forbidden to 
teach, and the rest are subjected to a system ot guarantees 
which makes it enormously difficult to obtain any teachers 
at all. Tlic years whicii followed witnessed a monotonous] 
series of repetitions of the Uskvib affair, and with the 
begmning of persecution came the plague of espionage. 
The Committee had to choose between the abandonment 
of its work, and the adoption of a ruthless police system. 
The disloyalty of one member might involve a whole 
province in ruin. One affair of this kind will serve as ani 
illustration. A native of Northern Macedonia who had! 
killed a Turk fled to the Southern Castoria district with the! 
avengers of blood at his heels, and posing as a martyr I 
persuaded the villagers to harbour him. Believing him to* 
be an outlaw, they readily admitted him to their confidencei 
and their secrets. He was a Christian by birth, but hadi 
secretly become a convert to Islam and had accepted service! 
as a Turkish spy. In three months he had learned all he* 
required to know, and was able to present the authorities; 
with a list of six hundred of the Committee's partisans.- 
Tortures and imprisonments followed on a vast scale, and^ 
those who escaped gaol, did so only by taking to the hills"' 



Digitized by GoogI( 



128 



MACEDONIA 



—4 euphemism which means in the Balkans that they 
became open rebels. The Committee was now a frankly 
terroristic organisation. Exposed to the hideous peri ls of 
Turkish rqsdaals, it became in it^.tucn nithte^^nd..sayage. 
Confro nted by the open hostil i ty of the G reeli; % ,it took up 
the £tuntletand replied to espionajEgand intrigue by assassi- 
natioa and wiolcncel u 'V^ilH rarry i*c m/wir of 

organisation only by means of its pe ripatetic bands of ou t" 

laws, and it shrank from tin yiaanft lyhi^lp misfit jjimin**** 

t he risks of their enterpris e. Occasionally it contrived to 
bribe the venal Turkish authorities to connive at its pro- 
ceedings. More frequently fear was its only weapon. It 
imposed an iron discipline upon all its partisans. Its 
decisions were debated freely and put to the vote, but once 
adopted^ it was held legitimate to punish disobedience with 
death. A village which showed itself remiss in provisioning 
or concealing a band ran the risk of seeing its men beaten 
and its houses burned. A peasant who revealed the least 
ol its secrets to an enemy was ruthlessly murdered. No 
doubt there was usually a qpedes of ^ial, and often a 
suspected person was warned to behave with more dis- 
cretion. But I am afraid that even trials and warnings 
o£Eered scant security that the wild justice of revenge 
would be honestly used. The Balkan peasant, bred under 
an Asiatic despotism, has only the most elementary concep- 
tion of justice and evidence, and the intimate life of the 
Macedonian village breeds reckless and unscrupulous 
hatreds. A private enemy has only to breathe the 
suggestion that a certain man is a traitor, and from that 
hour his fate is sealed* Suspicion is in the air and fear is the 
one universal passion. The least eccentricity of conduct, 
the slightest show of independence may doom a perfectly 
innocent man.< In Macedonia no man will trust another 

' T!ic inev liable result lias been lh,\l the Coinmitlcc moves and acts as 
one man. Personal liberty can hardly be said to exist, and one 
repeatedly makes the disconcerting discovery that all one's calculations* 
based upon the high character of some iadividiial we overthrown 
by the mysterious force behind him. A man whom one would trust 
absolutely in any ordinary relation of life may wish to act honourably, 
hot if the Comnuttee behind bim should feel impelled to intadfere, his 



Digitized by 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 129 



whose creed or opinions differ by one hairsbreadth from his 
own. I It is not intolerance. It is not biood-thirstiness. 
It is simply the typical Macedonian disease — the paralysing 
fear which tyranny begets. The Committee has done much 
good by raising the moral of the peasant, but it has wrought 
terrible evil by organising the pervadini^ fear into a system 
of oppression. But if one admits the right of rebellion one 
cannot eliminate violence. A revolutionary organibation 
has ns much right as a recognised Government to punish 
traitors and to lew taxes by force. In both cases the 
sanction is the same — the interests of a national idea. It 
makes much difference in law but none in morality whether 
this national idea is recognised by neiL;lil>ouring states, or 
whether the chiefs who are its spokesmen have a place 111 
the Ahuanach dc Golha. If to conserve its national idea 
a majority may rightfully coerce an individual, it may do as 
much to win formal recognition for its nationality. To 
deny the right of a revolted race to use force is sheer cant, 
if one also upholds that right in a constituted natioa. 
Only an anarchist may consistently censure. 

The worst developments of the Committee's terrorism 
were directed against the Greeks, and by common consent 
the teachers and priests of both races bore the brunt of 
theur ieud. The Greeks chose to denounce the Bulg^ian 

personality counts for nothing. He is simply a unit which obeys. 
The same conditions prevail under every strenuous secret society. la 
Tbrk^ the developmeats are worse and more glaring only because the 
tyrannv itM lf is grosser, and the need for an ab-olutc moral solidarity 

which obliterates private interests and overrides private scruples is also 
niore inipecative* 

' We had under us in our relief work men and women of all creeds 
and rnccs. T believe thnt nil of them were absolutely loyal. Rut while 
complcic coiiiidciicc reigned between us and them, the wildest sus- 
picions were at wotk among themselves. One man, an Albanian 
Protestant, who gave irte every proof of a rare courage and devotion in 
dangerous aiui cSfficuit circumstances, was the continual butt of the 
vm^fAom of oar Cafludic and Orthodas helpers. They were as 
honourable as himself. But no tale was too mad for them to believe of 
him. For them he was a trnitrr and the ori<^in of cverv trouble that 
arose. I questioned them careiuliy, but tlicy ii<id never a tittle of 
evidence. It was enough that he was a reserved and difficult man — and a 
Protestant. Had they been in w r g c nU tliflj would have mordered Um 
by a unammous vole. 



Digitized by Google 



I 



130 MACEDONIA 

teadiers and priests to the Turks as fomentors of sedition 
(^ich in lact tiiey were). The result was that these devoted 
men carried their lives in their hands, and went about their 
woric expecting torture, imprisonment^ exile, or death for 
their wages. The Bulgarians could not retort in kind. 
They assassinated. The only difference was that the Greeks 
murdered by proxy, the Bulgarians with their own hands. 
The instinct of the natural man is always agunst the spy 
and the informer. But It is only fair to recognise that these 
Greeks in their turn were doing what they conceived to be a 
patriotic work. They too took their lives in their hands. 
Hiey obeyed their prelates, they were applauded in Athens, 
they were sustained by a consciousness of patriotic motives. 
Both sides were the victims of a narrow nationalism. It is 
true that the Bulgarians were fighting for liberty, while the 
Greeks had allied themselves with the tyrant Again one's 
instinctive sympathies speak dearly. But again one must 
admit that the policy of the Greeks was adopted at the dicta- 
tion of a genuine if short-sighted patriotism* Both sides 
gave proof of courage, and both sides were guilty of rede- 
less crudty. A wcM-d from a Greek Bishop would often 
condemn a whole Bulgarian hamlet to ike flames. A 
Bulgarian band, descending by night upon a hostile village 
to murder a spy-priest and to burn his houses was not 
always careful to save his widow and her diildren from the 
conflagration. 

These acts of violence fill into several classes of difiEerent 
degrees of culpability, (i) The murder of spies and in- 
formers one must at once allow to be legitimate in extreme 
cases, if one admits that an oppressed race has any right to 
revolt It can do so with success only by safeguarding its 
secrets and protecting the lives of its adherents. (2) Where 
money is involved the case is more complicated. An agent 
of the Committee goes to a Greek business man in Monasttr, 
shows his credentials and demands the usual tax for the 
war of liberation. The Greeks who does not choose to be 
liberated in this way, refuses. The agent warns him, and 
returns a second time, and perhaps he uses threats and shows 
bis revolver. The Greek is a man of spirit and promptly 



I 



Digitized by Google 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 131 



denoimoes llie Bulgarian to the Turks-^-who are, after all» 
the nominal costodbns of public order. The Bulgarian is 
amatody pottibly tortured, and it may t>e contracts typhus 
in some pestilent dungeon and dies. The Greek was cer- 
tainly within his rii^ts, and deserves sympathy. But the 
Committee must either puniA him or else afaand<m its system 
of levying contributions by force. It does not hesitate 
between these alternatives, and the Greek, who is now a 
"traitor/' is presently shot, perhaps killed. Morally it is 
clear that the Committee is in the wrong, and yet, after all, 
it can argue with some plausibility, on the low plane of 
Balkan morality, that the end justifies the means. The 
whole system of levying contributions by violence is from 
the standpoint of individualism nothing more or less than 
organised brigandage. But it would be just as fair to com- 
pare it to legal taxation. It is at all events rather better 
than the Turkish system which Europe tolerates. It is not 
more violent, and, unlike the legal taxation, it is directed to 
an end <^ which the majority of the people approve. (3) A 
village which is entirely Slav in race language and sympathies 
has long desired to join the Bulgarian Church, to worship 
in its own tongue, to have its children taught in a language 
they can understand, and to avow its political leanings 
openly and boldly. But the headman, the priest, and the 
teacher are " Greeks " — i.^., they are Slavs who belong to the 
Greek faction. Their private interests su'e at stake, their self- 
love and perhaps their patriotism have also to be reckoned 
with. They oppose the official recognition of the Bulgarian 
nationality of the village, and they claim the ownership of 
the church and school which the peasants built with their 
own hands. The authorities support them, and until the 
peasants can show an official paper signed with the seal of 
the village, they cannot give in their collective adhesion to 
the Bulgarian Church. The problem then narrows itself 
down to seizing the seal which the headman has no sort of 
moral right to withhold against the wish of the villagers. 
He is, let us suppose, a man of some strength of character. 
He supports himself by appealing to the Greek Bishop, and 
the Greek Bishop threatens to denounce the whole village 



I 



Digitized by Google 



132 



MACEDONIA 



to the Turks as seditious — i.e,f to have it burn eel or sncked, 
or in one of many familiar ways placed beneath the harrow. 
The short way out of the difficulty is to murder the head- 
man, and the habit of the Balkans is to prefer short ways. 

These are definite cases which constantly recur, and I 
believe that in a rough way they cover most of the Com- 
mittee's acts of violence. The Greeks assert that it is nothing 
more or less than a league of murderers which systematically 
assassinates Greek teachers, priests, and notables in order 
to exterminate Hellenism. The Servians on their side tell 
a similar tale, and both races can show an appalling list of 
martyrs. The Bulgarian reply is that the Committee has 
never mmtlered a man merely for his Greek or Servian 
sympathies or even for any legitimate xeal he might display 
on behalf of the Greek or Servian causes. Undoubtedly a 
large number of the notables and pioneers of these races 
have been killed, but these murderSi it is claimed^ were all 
of them deliberate acts of reprisal in reply to some appeal 
to the Turkish authorities against the Bulgarian agitators. 
On tlie whole I think the balance of truth lies rather with 
the Bulgarian side of the case — though I confess that I 
express this opinion with hesitation — but the line between 
punishment and mere murder can never be accurately 
drawn. The indignation of the Greeks and Servians is very 
natural, and yet I do not sec what other means of defence 
the Bulgarians could have adopted against their rival's 
policy of espionage. It is probable that the limits of mere 
defence have often been overstepped, but some of ttie 
responsibility for such excesses must lie with the races who 
provoked them. One fact which has not been sufficiently 
weired tells on the Bulgarian side. During the first three 
wedks of the insurrection of 1903 they were the undisputed 
masters of the greater part of the province of Monastir. 
The Turks were taken by surprise, and the Greeks were 
entirely defenceless. And yet to the t>est of my knowledge 
no notorious instance of murderous violence occurred, 
although the Bulgarians actually occupied three country 
towns inhabitated mainly by Vlachs of the Greek faction. 
Had the policy of the Bulgarians really been to extemiinate 



Digitized by Go 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 133 



the Greek teachers and priests, they might, during these 
three weeks, have carried out a wholesale massacre with 
complete impunity. Their correct behaviour, while they 
had the power to work their will upon their enc-nies, seems 
to me a rather decisive proof that when thcv do resort to 
reprisals the mouve not race-hatred but an instinct of 
sclf-clctcncc. 

The mischief i«; not mciely that the Macedonians have 
their own standard.^ of humanity — they arc often unaware 
that any higher standards exist.' A Greek Bishop once 
fulminated to me against the Bulgarians for murdering 
Greek spies. I replied that in my view the worst thing they 
]iad done recently was to murder some Turkish lads vvhura 
they ciuL^ht unarmed dunng the insurrection. He was 
amazed and rather shocked, and could not understand why 
I should consider the murder of a Moslem as a crime. I 
never found the peasants at all shy of admitting their 
excesses, and this in a sense constitutes an excuse. I once 
had a talk with a man who had drugged ten Turkish soldiers 
in an inn and then burned them alive. When I expressed 
my horror, he replied by pouring out a tale which I confess 
staggered me — ^all the recent wrongs of his village — the men 
carried away captive into slavery by brigands, the women 
forced to appear in this same inn and to dance naked for 
the amusement of passing soldiers. Somehow my vocabu- 
lary of censure ran dry, and I tried to suggest that such 
reprisals wei e a mistake, since they alienate the sympathies 
of Europe. He replied that by murderinj^ ten men who 
richly deserved it, he had obtained ten nlies for the cau-e 
of liberty. "Surely," I answered, "the good opinion ot the 
civilised world is wortli more than ten rifles ?" He smiled 
bitterly, reflected for a moment and then, mimicking my 
tones, inquired laconically, "What was the good opinion of 
your civilised world worth to the Armenians r " I was 
silenced. " Judge not that ye be not judged " is a golden 

' A village once came mysteriously to us and asked m to direct the 
Relief Society's doctor to make up a strong poison. It proposed t0 
invite it ; loc d traitOTS toabcmqiaet Clcaily it had no idea that 
migjht disapprove. 



Digitized by Google 



134 MACEDONIA I 

rule in Macedonia. We too are weigfied in "the balance 
of criminality." 

• • » • • 

Late in the aiituinn of 1902 General Tzoncheff, acting in 
the name of the "Central' Committee,' which is little more 
than a Bul^ari^in nr<janisation with few roots in Macedonia 
itself, prochuniccl :i i;c[icr-il rii>ing. lie can hardly have 
hoped for any rc;il rcsponbe to his appeal, for winter war- 
fare is a;^anist the traditions of the Balkans. It wa-s iadeed 
'a bold dciiancc of the cUiua-tc, but it coiiltl do no harm to 
ihc Turks. General Tzoncheff crossed t)ie frontier in 
I November with about four hundred men, and in the region 
\oi Djumaia and Raslog, which adjoins the Bulgarian 
; boundary, he carried on a galia.iil guerilla cain.pa.ign for 
some three or innr weeks. About two hundred men from 
-the locality joined him, but the rival Internal Organisation 
'opposed his enterprise, and there was n(2_ general rising, 
even in the very limited district whicB he invaded. ^ By 
December all hi^htinL^ was at an end. General Tzoncheff 
and his baud returned to Bulgaria, and the peasants, who 
had taken little part in his adventure, were left to bear the 
brunt of the Turkish vengeance. There is much conflict 
of evidence as to what followed. The Russian official 
account is one long record of barbarities and tortures. 
The English Blue-Book is sceptical — perhaps unduly so. 
But certainly there was wholesale beating, some torture, 
some violation of women, and some burning uf houses. 
The terror was, at all events, general enough and serious 
enough to drive as many as three thousand peasants, in all 
the rigour of a Balkan winter, across the mountains of the 
frontier into the kindly refuge of Bulgaria. Although the 
Internal Organisation had no share in these events, and 
even tried to frustrate General Tzoncheffs wild enterprise, 
the Turks made no nice distinctions, and all over Macedonia 
the burden of the Turkish yoke grew heavier. Villages 
were searched for arms, which meaii> that the peasants 
were beaten and tortured until they produced them, and 
if they really possessed no nfle they were often constrained 

• See note at end of chapter. 



Digitized by Google 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 135 



to boy one in order to surrender it to Hie Turks, But this 
episode had one salutary result It reminded Europe onoe 
more of the Macedonian Question, which had been for^ 
gotten since the repression of 1897, and diplomacy began 
to occupy itself with the question of reforms. The Western 
Governments were comparatively indi£Ferent and took the 
lata! step of allowing Russia and Austria, as the^ two 
interested Powers, to manage the crisis as they pleased. 
The Sultan meanwhile was determined to anticipate the 
intervention of Europe, and in December, 1902, he drew 
up a scheme of reforms of his own, in v/hidi the only 
important item was that Hussein Hihni Fasha was appointed 
Inspector-General of the Three Vihyets (Uskubi Salonica, 
and Monastir). In February Austria and Russia published 
their first Reform Scheme, which was destined to remain a 
dead letter (see Chapter IX. pp. 304-305). Its sole effect 
upon the situation was to convince the Bulgarians that 
Europe would do nothing without some powerful stimulus, 
some bloody and sensational object-lesson, which would 
convince her that the misgovemment of Macedonia is an 
evil which calls for a drastic remedy. But what form should 
that object-lesscm take ? The Macedonians knew to their 
cost that it is useless to talk about the normal misrule under 
which they snfier. Petitions, deputations^ notes of protest 
and appeal from the friendly Bulgarian Government attract 
no attention whatever. Partial revolts and brutal repres- 
sions result in nothing more than futile remonstrance and 
feeble counsels ol reform. Europe acts with eneigy only 
when the lives and property of her own subjects are 
endangered. Then indeed the ironclads move, and the 
spectacle of cleared decks induces the Sultan to yield to 
superior force. The younger men among the Macedonian 
Extremists were full of this idea, and wild plans for attack- 
ing the railways and the consulates were in the air. It 
was thought that if the insurgents could create a state of 
anarchy dangerous to European capital the Concert would 
intervene. The Internal Organisation as a whole rejected 
this scheme, but there was a small group of Extremists" 

* I came to know one ol theic meu rather iutiuulely^ and a more 
pathetic and iaoongruoiis character I have never met He was a 



Digitized by Google 



13^ 



MACEDONIA 



who were determined to defy its discipline and to ^ivc this 
plan a trial. They concentrated their efforts upon a pi m 
to blow up the Ottoman Bank at Salonica, a large ind 
pretentious building in which a European manager and his 
family resided, and which formed the centre of European 
trade in the port. They worked steadily and secretly 
though 1 think many of the Bulgarians of the town were 
aware of their plot. They opened a little grocer's shop 
beside the bank and mioed laboriously, carrying away the 
earth irom their tunnel in paper ba^ and parcels. It ia 

Macedonian from Rcsna, educated in Balgaria, a schoolmaster by 
profebbioa, and twenty-three years oi age. His appointed task was 
to blow vtp a certain motqwi oa a ^vea Friday in order to excite Uie 
fanaticism of the Turks and to maSe a massacre inevitable. He was 
arrested before be could put it into executioQ, imprisoned for some 
aiontlut, and Hum releasedf. There was no evidenoe afltinst him, and 
Iho Turks did not know what his plan really was. In the gaol at 
Monastir where lie slept on stones and lived on bread and water, his 
healtli vva^ ruined and he contracted a galloping consumption. I 
found him living on charity in a very mIsOTaMe state, and the Relief 
Society's doctor did what was possible to make his end easier. I had 
many a talk with tiim, and though his scheme has always seemed to 
me merely diabolical, he was personally one of the gentlest and most 
attractive characters that I met ia HMdonia. His parents were 
peasants, but his mind and his manners were refined. He was intelli- 

fent and well-read, considering his youth and his scan^ opportunities, 
lis solaoe during the long days wlien be lay dying with a dear mind 
was to read incessantly, and his relaxation to gaze from his window 
upon the beauty of Ochrida Lake. The thought that he had left 
certain books utircad seemed to make htm more uneasy than any 
ahyilcal discomfort, and he would have oa teardi Macedonia for a 
translation of Sir W iltcr Scott, for one or two romances of Dumas the 
Elder, and— of all books in the world — for Bei Ami! But when he 
talked, ills amdety was always to hear political news. Patriotism was 
with him a consuming fever, and certain words — Liberty, Indepen- 
dence, and the like — would bring the fire to his eyes and a resonance 
to his hollow voice. His gentleness and resignation made devoted 
friends of two or three poor townsfolk who visited him. It was witti 
a constant shock that one realised that this kindly and sensitive nature, 
with its capacity for sympathy and its half -developed aesthetic tastes, 
could have been capaole of the bloody act of crimtmd heroism for 
which he had vowed to sacrifice his life. He was under the dominion 
of c r'nin abstract ideas, which obsessed him and paralysed his own 



brooded on the shame of slavery, the allm-ement of freedcnn, the glory 
that might await his liberated race, until no other thoughts were left in 
the patchwork of his mind — half tillage, half desert, ft he was typical 
of the Ifaoedooian terrorists they merit rather pitiful sympathy than 
oensore. 




enthusiastic temperament iiad 



Digitized by Goo 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 137 



said that the Internal Oi|pau8ation, hearing what was afoot, 
orderecl them to desist and sentenced them to death when 
they conttniied their work, so that they were compelled to 
strike their Uow prematurely. The Turks had been warned 
of what was going on, but nothing would induce them to 
interfere^ and the inference is dther that they were bnbtd 
or that they were dear-headed enough and Machiavellian 
enon^ to allow the Bulgarians to discredit themselves in 
the eyes of Europe unmolested. The bank in due course 
(April, 1903) was blown up with complete success, all 
Salonica was plunged into panic, and bombs were also 
thrown, though without much effect, at the railway station, 
the Kimak, the German School, and a European hotel. A 
F^ch steamship in the bay was oompletely wrecked. 
Most of the terrorists were killed^ either in resisting 
arrest or fay tiieir own bombs, and a massacre of the 
Christians oif the town was only averted by the belated 
energy of the old Vaii, who exposed himself fearlessly and 
managed to control and utilise his troops before the mob 
had done more than sixty Christians to death. These 
outrages had a disastrous effect upon the Macedonian 
Movement Public opinion in Europe was shocked, and 
only two or three of its more thoughtful leaders, like M. de 
Pre^ens^ and M. B^rard, had the insight to see that this 
cruel and desperate act, which, after all, required courage 
and devotion, was really a grim commentary upon the 
indifference of Europe. If we care nothing for the daily 
sufferings of the Macedonians, if neither petitions nor Blue^ 
Books nor the evidence of travellers will impress the facts 
upon our imagination, if we have forgotten our own 
pledges and the remedies we prescribed at Berlin, who is 
to blame if the abandoned victims of Turkish tyranny take 
strange means to jog our memories ? If we would listen 
neither to persuasion nor to cries, these young Macedonians 
were determined that we should hear dynamite. Our own 
deafness is as guilty as their violence. But the comfortable 
and the uninformed did not reason on these lines. Perhaps 
the outrage was not really serious enough to alarm them. 
At all events only a few ironclads came to Salonica, and 



Digitized by Google 



I3S MACEDONIA 

their mission was naturally not to coerce the Turks, but 

simply to protect the lives and property of the European I 

colony. The Turks, moreover, had the sense in the main 

to confine their protests and repression to legal means. 

They presented an ultimatum to Bulgaria, which they ^ 

withdrew immediately undc-r the pressure of Europe. For I 

the rest they contented themselves with stamping out the 

insurrectionary movement within Macedonia itself. There 

was no such massacre as the "anarchist" group expected 

to provoke, nothing but a round of minor cruelties and 

uninteresting oppressions— nothing, in short, which could 

attract the attention of Europe or stir its sluggish pity. 

Once only did the Moslem mob break bounds — at Monastir 

on St. George's Day (Old Style), and even then the number 

of victims was not considerable.' 

Tfie measure s which Hilmi P^^ha adopted to suppress 
the Macedonian Committee were drastic and wh olesale, but 
none The less inefTecjTve ; indeed, ihcy overreached them- J 
selves by their excessive severity. If the Turks co uld h ave i 
contented themselves with hunting dowji,tlieJxnids_(a thing 
they hardly attempted), and arresting the prinxe. movers of 
the agitation, they might have achieved their end. But 
when they proposed to . banish the ringleaders, Russia 
stood in the way, whereas they were allowe d to carry out 
their useless and provocative nieasures against the mass of 
the population, with the result that the Bulgarians were 
dnven to desperaflbri," aiul reyolted.in self-defence. Every- 
where, alike in the towns and in the villages, the notables 
of the Bulgarian communities were thrown into pn-iHi — 
not by twos and threeS| but by twenties and thurtics. Rich 

■ The Mo&lems were anxious to find a pretext for avenging the 
Salonica outrage. A rumour got about that tiie Bulgarians were going 

to blow up a mosque, and a trivial quarrel between a Turk and a 
Bulgarian in the market-place gave the signal for slaughter. Armed 
bands of Turkish civilians, tolerated, and sometimes aided, by the 
police, patrolled the streets for the best ptrt of two days. Ai it 
began on a feast day most of the Christians were within doors, and 
not many more than thirty were killed, though others were beaten and 
maltreated. The VaU posted troops somewmit tardfly, but none of the 
murderers were punished. The attack WIS quite tmprovokedt and 
Greeks suffered as well as Bulg^ians. 



Digitized by Google 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 139 



and poor, merchants from tbe cities, and lads from the 
upper chisses of the seconcI:ir\' schools, were herded together 
in the Turkish gaols. The schools were all closed, some- 
times by order, sometimes hccause they had been turned mto 
barracks for the troops, sometimts because the teachers had 
either been arrested or hnd fled to escape arrest. The very 
few Bulgarian doctors and lawyers who manage to exist in 
Macedonia — one could almost count them on one's fingers, 
so danf^eroiis is it to be possessed of educati(jn — were also 
imprisoned. J3usincss was at a standstill, and the very 
Jews in Salon ica were crvniL,' out because there were no 
Christian merchants left with whom they miglit do busi- 
ness. The cities were in a state of siege- Military patrols 
tramped the streets at all hours, and bivouacked outside the 
pruicipal buildini^s. The townsfolk were forbidden to stir 
abroad after sundown, and if urgent need arose for a doctor, 
he coul l be summoned only by bribing a soldier or police- 
man to fetch him. In the largfiudilages and-the country, 
towns where no consuls or Europeans reside the case was 
still worse. The entire male Moslem population of military " 
age had been called to the colours, reinforced by the ra gge d , 
l>egiments of Asia Minor and the defiant, undisciplined levies 
fjol Albania. These troops were quartered in the villages " 
' and the smaller towns, and they naturally vented their anger 
at being called away from their fields upon the Bulgarian 
inhabitants. The rAgArw^^/^f^^A^ » h;r/ | ^j^cc (Tinfii -^^^ 

Landsturm) had_ th^ yorslt «''^p"mmni ..3?^/'y j"^^^*^ all 
unpaid, and frequeatl|L XfiCCEKCiL-ao. rations ; indeed, when 
I was in Monastir the army contractors had been so long 
unpaid that they refused to supply even bread upon credit. 
The result was that the^ troops had _no choice but. tQ„iive 
upon the peasants. One met them strolling about the 
streets adorned with alt manner of looted garments, some- 
times wearing socks which they had stolen from the women, 
and sometimes carrying thmm^akin nna*^ their shabby 
u niform s. Their chief occupation was to search for arms, 
and as a Turk is always too Uusy to look for concealed 
weapons, they took the simpler and shorter course of 
torturing or beating the villagers— men, women, and 



Digitized by Google 



1 



I40 MACEDONIA 

children — order to force them to reveal the hiding* 
places of the weapons they were supposed to possess. 
What all this meant in physical pain, in material loss, and 
in the dishonour of the women, the imagination can hardly 
conceive, for scarcely a village went free* I was in one 
rural centre, Doiran, during the height of the persecution. 
It is a tiny town on the borders of a lake among purple 
mountains, the centre of a region so beautiful that one left 
the fields for its narrow streets, reluctant and afraid, 
knowing well the human misery that lay concealed behind 
the white walls and red tiles which glittered in the sunshine. 
I remember arriving at ten o'clock in the morning to find 
that the Turkish authorities were still asleep, while the 
Albanian leines in the town were very much awake, and 
drunl^ with rifles in their hands. Despite the risk from 
spies (half the place was ''Greek" in its politics^ though not 
a word of Greek was ever spoken) the women had no 
sooner heard that Europeans had come to the town than 
they beg^ to crowd our inn, filing through in groups, each 
with its miserable tale to tell. They were all in tears, 
demoralised as much by what might happen as by what 
had actually taken place ; for rumour was always ready to 
assert that a massacre had occurred in some neig|it>ouring 
town, or that this Christian village or the other had been 
burned to the ground, and Doiran expected that its turn 
would come next But the women wete mainly con- 
cerned for the fate of husbands, sons, l)rothers, arrested 
on suspicion and detained without trial. There were sixty 
political suspects in Doiran gaol, and others had been 
drafted to Salonica, while a few had been released. 
These latter had harrowing tales to tell of the cruelties 
which went on night by night within the gaol. One 
young lad had been liberated, with lame and shapeless 
feet, after a merciless bastinado. Othersi he said, liad 
fared worse than he, and there were ^e-witnesses to testify 
that some at least of these prisoners had been forced at the 
bayonet-point to walk up and down the corridor of the 
prison night after night, in the hope that the madness 
which comes to a man deprived of sleep would induce 



I 

Digitized by Goo gle i 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 141 



them to reveal some guilty conspirator's secret. Another 
prisoner had been forced to stand hour after hour with 
his hands raised above his head. There was no prospect 
of mercy or redress* The women could only weep and 
tell their story, and we could only promise to report 
tiie facts to one of the consuls. When the matter was at 
length brought to Hilmt Pasha's notice he telegraphed 
promptly to the |»elect {Caimakam) of Doiran in some- 
tiung like tiiese terms : It is said that yon are twturlng 
your Bulgarian priscmers. Is this true? If so, a Com- 
mission will be sent to investigate your responsibility." 
Naturally the man replied with a stout denial, and Hilmi 
Piasha, satisfied that he had done his duty, showed the two 
telegrams in triumph to the consuL 

Other measures of repression even more disastrous were 
lightly undertaken. The gaols would not hold all the 
Bulgarians of Macedonia, and so the order went forth 
that every man of peasant origin in the towns must return 
to his native village and stay there. For fear of outrage or 
disturbance, the thousands of Macedonian Bulgarians who 
repair year by year to Constantinople to earn a little com- 
petence were ruthlessly expelled, and driven b.ick to then 
homes. The migratory masons and carpenters who mh:ihit 
such villages as Smilovo and Smerdesh in winter, and spend 
the summer Wcinclering about in quest of work, were also 
interned in their homes diirinij; tlie only season when their 
work was possible. Oi all ilic mvAns which could liavc 
been devised to provoke a rebellion this was the most 
efficacious, for all these lliousands of able-bodied men, the 
most energetic and intelligent section of the population, 
were deprived of subsistence and occupation, and left in 
idleness and anger to concert their revenge. Finally, 
thanks mainly to the brutality of the soldiery, who also 
had a grievance, since they were haled from their lands 
just as the season of harvest was approaching, the normal 
insecurity of the roads became so intolerable that even the 
peasants rarely cared to quit their villages. Murders, some- 
times with a motive, sometimes at the prompting of mere 
wanton brutality, were everywhere of daily occurrence, and 



Digitized by Google 



142 



MACEDONIA 



the murder-bookSy grim catalogues which are kept in every 
bishopric and consulate — the only original literature which 
Macedonia produces — ^had their blank pages rapidly filled. 
For this violence the Turks were only partly to blame. 
Encouraged by the obvious intention of the authorities to 
bring the Bulgarians under the harrow, the Greeks betook 
themselves with redoubled zeal to the work of esfMonage, 
and they paid the price in blood. Moreover, it was the 
poliqr oi the Committee to reply to violence with violence. 
The Turks of Monastir punished the Christians of the town 
by an attempted massacre as a reply to what had happened 
in Salonica, and the Bulgarians in the viUagies round 
Monastir exacted retribution by murdering local Moslems. 
The result of this competition in bloodshed and injustice 
was a nightmare of terror in which the whole nonnal life 
of Macedonia stood petrified and fear-bound. Within the 
space of ten daeys in the month of May I visited three 
market-towns on market-day — Monastir, Doiran, and 
KQprili— to find the market-place deserted and silent 
The merchants were in prison, and tiie peasants dared 
not quit their homes; indeed, where their fields lay at 
any distance from the hamlet even tillage was suspended. 
The plague would have wrought less havoc flian this Itffl 
and regular persecution, whidi Hilmi Pasha directed in ttie 
intervals of reforming Macedonia. 

Meanwhile the band?, /v^twrfanrty rtrntlt^i frnm ih^ m» 

army of outlaws and suspects, were not idler though aa yet 
they dig not willing ly assum e the aggr^ine . Wherever 
the troops ca me up with them a bloody stain was left upo n 
the "countrysid e, and it was rather the peasants than the 
insurgents who suffered. I came upon the villa ge of Mogill a 
(about el^t miles from Mo'nasiir) orieaRemoon. just as th^ 
troops were leaving it a^^tr T"^ affaira They 

straggled along, a disorganised herd, without officers and 
carrying the trifling spoils which ^ey had been able to 
glean in the miserable hamll^ y hich l av smoking behind 
4iem. A litUe band of outli^ws under a gallant youn g lead er 
named Svetkoff, once a teacher of music in the Mpipastir 
Higb School, had been trapped in some isola ted mud cabins 



Digitized by 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 143 



l ust outside the village . The.jjglice . w«>r*> cAorrhipg f^^ 
hidden arms, and when thev came to th ese houses fliey 
we re received with a v olley. Tr oops were hurried up w ith 
can non, and a regu lar siege was laid to these flims^J^Uls. 

Through an afternoon and a night t}\ Q Bulgarians 

held_ out, firing^ whenever ^a . f pe_ sh owed himself ab ove 
the^ m^ 'walf s^ which enclosed their little Jortress. Jn 
tEe intervals of fighting, s o the Turks told us, theY.danged 
a~ yim step to the t une of some ballad of rev^oltj shout- 
iiig ali the while their defiance of the slaves who 
besieged them, their contempt for the Sultan, and their 
readiness to die free men. T hey could have had n o 
d oubt about their fate, for the wall left no way of escape . 
and the Turks behind it were firing comfortably thr ough 
loop-holes. The end came before dawn, when^a shot from 
the m ountain gu ns set the_poor fortress of the outlaws 
ablaze . At t he same t i me the Turks set on fire se venteen 
houses of the village to serve them as lamps for their marks- 
manship-^ne lEinks of Nero's Christian torches. Onejby 
one, as they dash ed ou t, the survivorgofthe little band were 
shot down withinlQie enclosure. When I arrived the ground 
was still blood-stained. The mud walls still smouldered 
and glowed ; a stork looked vainly for her accustomed 
roof from a perch on a crumbling gable, and the air 
was charged with the stench of burning flesh. In the 
churchjrard the last scene of the tragedy was going forward. 
The villagers were burying the contents of two great carts — 
corpses heaped in a mass of charred and dishonoured flesh. 
There were eleven dead insurgents, their bodies stripped 
and mutilated by their savage and unchivalrous enemies, 
four innocent peasants of the village and two young women 
shot while the search for arms went forward. Among the 
weeping crowd of village mothers and widows stood two 
little girls, who had been wantonly w^ounded. The priest 
of the place, a frail old man, lay speechless and paralysed 
on a heap of straw at the point of death, and the peasants 
were carrying the dead rebels to their last trenches, without 
service or prayer. It was a scene of misery and moral 
squalor. The homeless families wept for their burned 



Digitized by Google 



I 

144 MACEDONIA 

hovels, and the bereaved peasants lor their dead relatives 
With the piercing animal grief of the East But at the time 
I fancied they had few thoughts to spare for the insurgents 
who had fallen in their cause. The scene seemed to teach 
how little life is worth in the Balkans. It is neither 
reverenced nor valued, and if a bullet ends it— why, then, it 
only ends a long series of miseries and oppressions, cuts 
short a few years of fruitless toil and petty sufferings that 
have not even the halo of heroism to redeem them. Six 
months later I heard this same fight recounted in a popular 
ballad, and realised that poor Svetkoff, whose handsome 
form I had seen tossed like so much rubbish into the pit, 
had become an immortal name, inscribed in the calendar of 
freedom. The Bulg^tfttns hide their sentiment and conceal 
their deeper emotions, while they jostle sacred things with 
common ^ades. The sequel was easy to guess. Here 
were seventeen homeless fomilies, which included nigh thirty 
able-bodied men. Their only hope now was to join a roving 
band. It was safer on the whole to be in the mountains 
with a rifle on one's back than to cringe in a village out- 
wardly loyal. It was not difficult to imagine how these 
men from Mo^la would fight They carried with them 
the picture of murdered wives and wounded daughters, of 
smoking homesteads and the charred bodies of comrades. 
They woufd neither spare themselves nor pity others, their 
dim minds ruled by no bdtitr law than vengeance. And 
that also is part of their misery. Outrage begets outrage, 
and each race demoralises its foes. 

In the same week of May an incident on a much more 
horrible scale occurred at Smerdesh, a big village of over 
2,000 inhabitants vMch lies on the main road firom Castoria 
to Fiorina. It is a gloomy and forbidding place, built of 
stone upon a gaunt hillside in a narrow valley where the 
sun shines for no more than three hours in a day. There 
is little tillage and but scanty pasture around it, but the 
peasants none the less are wealthy and enterprising, itinerant 
masons for the most part, who ply their tiade all over the 
Levant, and invest some part of tibetr savings in substan t ia l 
and roomy houses. It had i great churdi with carved 



Digitized by Google 




TCHAKALAkOFF, COMMANDER OF THK SOUTHERN INSURGENT CORPS, 
TAK.hN DURING THE OCCUPAIIUN OF KLISSOUKA, IWM 



GoogI 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 145 



pillars, of which it was inordinately proud, and a large 
sdiooL It is the native place of Tchakal aroff, the crue l but 
c ompetent ^en^ral pf the Southern insurgen ts, and amon g 
th e village fanailies his rdati^es form a sort of aristocracy . 

Tit^ TiVrlra haH Inng ft^r^ atirf Qtifip^i>H RmmrAjHAx 
Trhakalarr>ff_nftpn visif<>H if^ ^nA few IVtHw mvmr veninr^ 

toapproach it Th ere had been a skirmish near it dur ing I 
April , and ^ pnniti-"^T*^^*'^" miii^ii «^TfM ft"* flithrin^ f 
the place had marched b ackjwithout daring to enter it.! 
Nothing further occurred for some five weeks, and then' 

gnHdenly a |;irjrrp fnrcft of ragnlarft tinder one Haireddi n I 
Rjrphaghi (major). armmfianifH h v a swarm of bashi ' | 
b azouks,^ came march inL^ up the road fro m Cast oria, toward s » 
sundown on the evening of May the ais t^ This man is a 
semi*civilised person of handsome pr^enoe and polished 
manners, who studied in Paris, and had been professor of 
French in the Military Academy of llonastir. He also it 
was who commanded the troops at Armensko, where the 
worst earo ess e o of the insurrectionary period were per- 
petrated. It was long a puzzle to me why Smerdesh, which 
had given no overt provocation, whatever Tchakalaroff may 
have done, should have been signalled out for a horrible 
punishment. The explanation was, I am told, that 
Haireddin Bimbashi had arranged w i th the bashi-baza uks . 
that by way of payment for the license ht allowed. them, he ! 
s hould receiv e a substantia l pro portio n of the p roceeds of ; 
the sale of the loot. Once again it turns out that greed lies • 
at the root of Turkish oppression. It was, I thinl^he worst j 
case of its kind in Macedonia. For there was go fij ^ ht, np J 
r esistance , no^jjad^y^-JiQ-amimi Qns to s urrender. ! 
The people of Smerdesh, seeing the Turkish force I i 

' The word bashi-bazauk means simply "civilian," and in this context ll 
de notes a Moslem villager w ho to ok up nls riHc to a »?ist tlic tyoopsp 1 1 

' T obtained full debils of tfils affair during two nights passed in 
Smerdesh in the winter. On the first occasion a Turkish omcer was 
with me, but the men told their tale fearlessly in his presence. On the 
teoond occaai on I was alone, and they talked with entire freedom. I 
also heard some curious details frcnn certain Turks who disapproved ol 
Haireddin Bimbashi's pecfomaooeB. Him also I had the misfortone 
to meet socially. 

h 



Digitized by Google 



146 MACEDONIA 

approacfai and having no means of defence— for there was 
no insurgent hand eiSier in or near the village on that day < 
—sent a deputation to make their submission and to ask for 
considerate treatment The deputation was met half-way 
by a volley of musketryi and returned to report its failure* 
The guns were then brou^t up, the viUage surrounded and 
subjected, during the ni^t, to a heavy cannonade. A few 
houses were set on fire in this way. Two hours after dawn 
the troops and the tofti-toofiib rushed in, and set to work 
to pillage and burn methodically with the aid of petroleum. 
The troops were withdrawn before noon, and the haski^ 
baxouks left in possession for two whole dxys. One hundred 
and sixty-six houses were reduced to ashes, and nothing but 
a solid beam, a comfortable hearthstone, or a stone which 
gives a name and a date remains to commemorate what once 
were homes. The great church is a mere roofless shell, and 
the school a heap of rubbish. The majority of the in- 
habitants contrived somehow to escape in tiie darkness, 
before the investing cordon was completely formed^it 
is said also that they had subterranean shelters. About one 
hundred and thirty who remained were massacred ; over 
fifty were wounded, and many women and girls are said 
to have been outraged. One heard pitiable stories of 
villagers who hid themselves to escape the soldiers, only to 
peri^ in the flames. One old priest pretended to be dead, 
and some ruffian flung a great stone upon him. Another 
priest bought his life from one marauder only to be caught 
empty-handed and murdered by the next Most of Ihe 
wounds were inflicted at dose quarters with steel, and one 
heard tales which sounded authentic about bed-ridden 
women too weak to flee who expired under the lust of the 
soldiers. About sixty houses escaped the conflagration, 
naked and stripped, and in them the once prosperous 
village, proud of ite wealth, its industry, and its education, 
found shelter through the following winter. It had no 

* I am not abiolatdy sore of this. Some accounts say that about 

twenty insurgents were present, who may have fired. But this the 
villagers stoutly and unanimously denied. At all events even if a faw 
shotb were fii ed, there was no prolonged or general resi:>unce. 



Digitized by Google 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 147 



capital with which to rebuild, and no leisure or opportonity 
to work. For it was still a mark for the hostility of Greelra 
and Turks, and through the greater part of the year the 
Greek Bishop oi CastorKi, who had been appointed a sort 
of trustee for the vilhi,L;L after the catastrophe, refused to 
grant passports to the Exarchist inhabitants who sought 
permission to go abroad in search of work. They had 
arrani^red a little chapel in d sherl, to take the place of their 
ruined church. On the walls they had liui^i^ httle water- 
colour sketches of Christ and the Madonna to serve nistead 
of the valuable eikom they iiad lost. On a day when i 
visited the place a column of troops had just left the village, 
and the marks of their bayonets were visible upon the poor 
httle pictures of this improvised shrine. 

Shortly after these incidents at Mogilla and Smerdesh the 
Insurgent Convention met and deliberated on their position. 
They were not prepared for a general nsmg. They had 
neither money nor arms nor ammunition enough. But 
they could not afford to suliin t to a repression so over- 
whelming and so brutal without sliiknig some blow in 
return. To liave lain idle under such provocation would 
have meant the collajose of the propaganda, and the lo^a of 
all the fruits of then ten years o£ steady work, i hey had 
indeed given the first provocation, if they are to be held 
responsible for the acts of the desperate youths who blew 
up the bank at Salonica. But the Turks were no longer 
punibhing. Their aim was to crush the Buli^anan race in 
Macedonia. The school>, the churches, and the commerce 
of the Bulgarians as well as their puiiiicai organisation were 
in peril. Europe was indiiierent, and unless they were 
prepared to succumb, they had no choice but to save 
themselves. They decided to proclaim a general rising 
after the harvest. It ^vas, under all the circumstances, a 
war of self-defence. For a brief period the guerilla bands 
were inactive, and on the night of the 2nd of Aui^ust, T903, 
the supreme moment arrived. But even in thi^^ desperate 
situation the Bulgarians sliowcd their habitual prudence. 
They knew that they might fail. They knew that further 
efforts might be necessary. They knew also that the 



Digitized by Google 



MACEDONU 



districts which revolted would be so ulleily devastated 

that they would be incapabli: oi lurther revolt for many 

years to come. It wai iiccordin^ly decided tiuit Xinly the 

province of Monaitir.-Shoiild be c iIIlcI upon to rise, and 

even there curUin districts were Lxcnijited (notably Perlepe 

and Morihovo). Several raoti\L^i diclalcd the choice of 

Monastir. The couiitry is mauutaiiiuud and suitable for 

guerilhi wiif ue, The peasants are resokite and well 

organised. Since Muxia:>ui" docs not. ad^om Ihci Bulj^urian 

frontier, it would be obvious to Eui ope that the movemeiit 

was a jjenuine Macedoimii rcvuU, and not a mere invasion 

organised ia die Pi mcipality. Finally, a revolt under tlie 

direction, of the Committee ui this suuiiisra province 

clai med b y the Greeks w ou ld serve to advertise th e fact 

thatlhe rural population is not Hellenic but Bulgaria n. 
" t""^ « 1^ 0 m ' 

The moment for which the Bulgarian population had 
been preparing for ten years arrived on the festival of the 

Prophet J£li as— the ^-vpninj-r nn^iTnrl.iy AiigiKit thp ^nrl^ Tf^nj. 

The Tur ks and eve n the Eur opeans ig M arpd th i were 
taken by^urprise. ^o one belie ved that a pea^>antry. lo ail 
appearance so crushed and brutalised, was really .cajjable 
of a serious mi l itary d emonstration on a scale v^ich 
entitles it to the name of a general rising. It is true there 
were rumours of what wa^ commf^. The peasants, wlicii 
one talked of the future, would sli;ike their heads and say 
wisely, "After the harvest you will see." But Macedonia 
is so used to threats and rumours that no one was seriously 
alarmed. Moreover, the relative calm which reigned 
throughout June and July had deceived the Turk^i* as it 
\yas intended to do. They still had some thou ght o f 
making war on Bulgaria, and they were still concerne d 
about the possibility of a fresh Albanian moveitient, and 
the result was that the greater part of their formidable army 
; was grouped in the northern districts. iQ^Mj^naslirJhey 
had no more than fifteen thousand men, and these were 
scattered along the railway and throughout the int erior . 
The chief command, moreover, belonged to Omer Ruchdi 
P^ha, an elderly and old-fashioned soldieri whose vaciiia* 



Digitized by Go 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 149 



tion and incapacity still further aggravated the con- 
sequences of the surprise which the Committee had 
organised. 

The signal was given by the burning of some haystacks 
just outside tTie town of Monastin The revolt was pro- 
claimed, and the banners blessed in the village churches, 
and before the short summer oi^ht was over the beacons 
had raised the whole of the higlilands which stretch 
westward to Qc hrida y north ward to Dibra, and southwards 
to Castoria and Klissoura. The plan of campaign had been 
carefully thought out in advance. For years thfi-XQuntry 
had been divided into military zones, each with its per- 
manent cadre of seasoned guerillas, and each with its recog- 
nised chief. W hen the signal was given the young^men of 
the villages who formed the atanduig reserve of Ihe peasant 
army dug up their buried rifles, assumed their cartridge- 
belts, and set off with their cloaks and j)rovisions_lo_the 
appointed rally in^-^lace. Their jirst duties were simple. 
Everywherejheyjcut the telegraph lines — a measure which 
in itself paralysed the bureaucratic machine, and made of 
the Turkish officials, accustomed as they are to regard 
themselves as the hands and eyes of some distant superior 
at the end of a wire, mere agitated units. Next came the 
wrecking of the bridges and culverts along all the main 
roads — an easy task in a country where everything is in 
decay. 5nTie~same time the isolated inns which serve as 1 
military posts alon^ the irunk roads were ruthlessly burned./ 
The railway line between Monastir and S alon ic a was also 
cut, buFTTot so completely or so often .as^it..ought to have 
been. The first Turkish reinforcements, it is true, had to 
march over the mountains from Uskub to Monastir, but in 
a very few days the railway was working steadily once 
more. Finallyj each band employed itself on the cmigeniali 
task of burning the keeps and towers of the Albanian bcysl 
— ^forfresses built by forced labour, and nests of robbery and|| 
oppressio n — and somet imes, it must be added, in murdering I 
their owners. Some isolated TuLkish posts were also rushed/ 
and destroyed, and some convoys captured on the roads.jl 
la all these destructive activities the baods hurrym^ to ' 



Digitized by Google 



ISO 



MACEDONIA 



group themselves around the Maoedonian flag were practi- 
cally unmcrfestod and unopposed. 

In adJ| flie. active .r^nks. of the insurgent army in the 
. Monastir Pjpogjnce. mustered as nearly as I can estimate 

I s ome jiy eTilO"?^nf^ n^gn- It^as nn Hniiht a small force 
Witfijgh igh to oppnsp the largp army nf eig htyJhPtf^.d 

* men triiich tfie Tu rk^ were sooa a ble to assemb le. It had 
I no caval ry and no artillery — save two or thr ee primi t ive 
■ pieces hollowed , out oi. chfiDcy- trees, according to the 

traditional plan followed in all Balkan risings. I diouM 
doubt if more than one man in four among the insurgents 
had ever been under fire before, or had practised marks- 
manship, although most^ of them had pi obably received 
sorne sort ul drilL But they trusted each otlier aud-llieir 

Feaders. They knew llic uiuuiiLim patiis, and could march 
)y~nTght as well as day — a thio^ which no Turkuiii regi- 
nent will ever do. Their offi cers in cluded not a few really 
capable guerilla chiefs. The headquarters were at first in 
he lur^^c village of SmllPVO, half a day's journey from 
Monastir — one of those prosperous communities of migra- 
tory masons and carpenters which were the backbone of 
the insurrection. Here was gathered the general staff — 
' Damian Grouell, Lozancheff, and Boris Sarak)ll. Sarafoff 

* became the De Wet of the campaign, moving Ijghjly about, 
I accompanied by a picked band, and rallying the local levies, 

* now in Fiorina and again in Ochrida, for some exceptional 
effort. Lozancheff contrived by some unhappy chance 
to discredit himself in the eyes of his men. Groueff 
remained in commarid Jii_,„Ulc. vvJ^ and~kept 
in touch with Monastir, where the consuls were regularly 
furnished with bulletins and reports, neatly manifolded and 
drafted in very tolerable French. Next in prestige was, I 
think, the southern detachment \yhich worked in the 

! Castoria-Klissoura reg^ion under the command of Tchaka- 
, laroff of Smerdesh, a cruel but niagnetic man, whose 
/ handsome presence and proverbial luck inspired his 
followers with complete confidence. The Resna contingent 
was commanded by a capable chief named Arsof, and the 
no rthern bands aro^^nd K jrgfhf^vn ^^f-rf^ imH^r a Vlaf,h 



Digitized by Google 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 151 



named Hton Goul^ who was kilted in the second week of j 
the rising. TtiCLQclicida, JQlchevo, pi^**'^ ^^^w^^*^ I 
T"'^-i!3L,H ^" «m^njH. /i^#»h«mi>«K» and had no very^ 
conspicuous generals.' The population of tl|C viljs^gps 
whidi gave themselves.over unreservedlyjo the jofiyement 
is about sixty thousand, but reinforcements j;ame Jfrom | 
some oifi'er villages a&.well. About 1bne in~sixl)f the1aiye I 
pupulatipn :vei£.UDde!: smSt which is certainly a considerable 
figure. The Conunittee could, no doubt, have put other. 
1 reserves in the fiel d if i t had had a larg^, su pply of good 
1 rifles. The favourite weapon was the Gras^ a cheapi heavy, , \ 
I inaccurate^ and altggethn: inferior ri with a single breech*! ^ 
lloading action ; but many bands wisely preferred the Martin i, ' *! 
and some few had magazine rifles. The bands were cer*[«l 
tainly mobile when one compares them with the THrkishI 
columns^^b ut the ir action was confined to thftir own dia- , 
t ricts unless, inde erl, th^y xygfi^ drivfin from Onf fff^'O" io 
another— a fate which ultimately befell both Groueff and 
TcEaEaUrofl. On the whole, when one considers how 
small the area affected really is, this was a smnewhat 
primitive plan. From th^fxtrfimf? wrst (Ochrida) nf the 
rebellious region t o the extre me _east (Sorovitch) is, not 
further ttian a good horsejaD an^ we ll mountegL-j^ji. cide in 
*^ lo ng summeT ^tys. From Castoria in the south to 
Km dievo in the north is no furthe r. But there were 
doubtless sound reasons for adopting the plan of isolated 

and local action. If .ti?g_who le force had come together to 
achieve some large enterprise _th ey would have had to 
abandon their yilli^ and thek.iamili.es to the, lujcbf^ked . 
fury of the bas hi-baza uks, Moreovgri the co untry, tho ugh | 
the distances are not gr eat, is ex ceedin gly mountainous , so 
that rapid mardung was out of the question. 

The first three weeks of the insurrection were a period of I 
almost unchecked tnuiQphp IheJEurks seemed inrapable 

* Tiic n umber the '^"^"'•ai contingents were, roughly, as follows ; 
Smilovo ana ujavata, iboot 650 ; Kradievo, 4acu Demir-Hiisar, ^204. 

Resna, 450 ; Prcsba, 300 : I'lorlna, 450 ; Caj,toria, 700 ; Ochrida, SSo; 
Kitchcvo, 350; Monastir Fiain, 250. In all about„4JiQQ4, But I give 
thuhc iigures uoder t&acrve. I have seen no official lists. 



Digitized by Google 



152 



MACEDONIA 



*^^T1ff ft^ Mftnaff^"', nrihrtria^ and Ca storia. the insoTgcn t* 
. were almost everywhere supreme. Tljfjy «nnfc thriNi 
I coontfY to wns of l&ich evo, K fipbor a, ao^LlSfiSBskft— all of 
' them Vladi centres perched i n the most in accessible p o8i« 
\ tions upon the mountain-side. The Turkish garrisons 
I either fled or succumbed with hardly a show of j^KisjAnce. 
Demonstrations were also made against the towns of Resna 
and Kitdievo, but here the attack was new pressed home. 
In the three captured positions provisional governments 
were installed, the insuigents danced with &e girls of the 
pbice in the town squares^ and from the churches^ beUs 
(which the Christians rarely dare to ring) summoned the 
townsmen to hear glowing orations upon the duty of 
rebellion and the glorious prospect of freedom. These 
three weeks must have been the hsqypiest interval which 
Macedonia has known since the coming of the Turks. The 
men_ flung away their fezes —ba'j^f-^ of fypj^fwH^— ati#i 
walked erect without fear of a beating or a bastinado. It is 
to their credit that, instead of enjoying their brief triumph at 
the expense of their Greek rivals, they bore themselves 
tolerantly and al>stained from violence-^save that they levied 
money contributions from the captured towns. They acted 
indeed in the spirit of the proclamation trhich announced 
the outbreak of the insurrectton<— a document which shows 
that humane ideals do penetrate even into the Balkans, 
however hard the local conditions make it to observe 
them:— 

"We are taking up arms against tymmiy and barbarism : we are 
j acting in the name of liberty and huinauity ; our work is above all 
I pejudioM o£ nationality or race. We on^t therefore to treat as 
i brothers all who iifTcr in the sombre Empire nf the Sultan. To-da}' 
all the Christian populations are wretched, nor mjist we except 
even the Tiu-kish peasants. We regard the Turkish Qovernment 
as our sole enemy* and all who declare themielves against us 
whether as open mes or as spies, and all too who attack old men, 

i women, and defenceless children instead of attacking us. It is 
against them that we direct our blows and from thm we shall 
tt9»f& ven^aanoe*" 

A sensible attempt was sometimes made to secure the 
neutrality of Mohamedan villages, and occasionally with 



Digitized by Go 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 153 



success, as the following quaint document addressed by the 
notables of a Turkish village to the insurgent headquarters 
in Kruchevo proves: — 

** We understand by the tenor of your letters that yoo are not 
CvU men, that you have not left your hearthi in order to attack the 
peaceful population (like ours), and that you are opposed only to the 
evildoers and to the Government which protects them. But those 
whom you seek are not to be found among ot. They have fled to 
the towns. As for ourselves we promise to remain quiet. If your 
intention is to kill the innocent you have only to come here. May 
God help those whose quest is justice 1 We have sent on your 
Other letters to the neighbouring vUfa^sa■» which are also ol onr 
nay of thinking." 

For a brief period everything promised concord* and 
success. Indeed, the__insurgents had jQ_all appearances 
triumphed_so easily th at they gave t hemselves over to 
rejoicings and neglected to push their advantage by uniting 
their forces against the Turkish garrisons in such centres as 
Rcsna, OclindaJKitclifiYCvCastori£i» ani^rpvitch. Ochrida 
and Castoria could have been taken only at great cost, but 
the other places were by no means impregnable. It would 
be a mistake to consider this temporary triumph as a real 
military success, but it was and is of enormous moral 
importance. It was a brief hour of happiness in the long 
winter of misery, and the memory of it is still a stimulus, at 
least to the younger men. 

' It is proper in an tmpartiai narrative to record the instances in 

which the insurgents were untrue to their ideal, (i) On the first day 
of the insurrection a detachment under Tchakalaroff met a party of 
imaniied Moslems from tlie village Djerveni oo the road to Castoria, 
and maisacred twenty-four men and four boys in cold blood ; four boys 
were spared. The village was afterwards besieged and burned. (2) 
Tchakalaroff wh en dr i ven from Klibsoura made a raid, with six hundred 



little haiiilcisrrriEir^ -houses in all. C3) TTire e Turkish villa^^es were 
burned by way of reprisal in the Presba region. (4) The famiUes of 
tiie TNifknh officials in Kruchevo were well cared tor and fed by flie 
insurgent^ while the town was in ttieir hands, but during the attack two 
Turkish women wero killed — possibly by accident. This was an 
isolated occurrence, and I believe the only occasion on which the 
insurgents were guilty of any wrong towards women. On the whole it 
is remarkable that so little barbarity was practised on the Christian 
side. The Committee behaved much better during the insurrection 
tiiaa eitlier before or since. When it had the power to do incalculable 
iU it displayed aelf-cootrol and moderation. 



men into the Coloma district, which i 




ly Albanian. He burned six 



Digitized by Google 



I 

I 



1 54 MACEDONIA 

The fir«f cipi ^^f f«*>rgy tnlil^A ihm Ttirirtt r^;Qplayf»r^ mat 

i , th e dispatch of a force o f about three tiio usand men und<y 
I Bakiiar_ yasfta to retaiEe K ruchevg T hey had eighteen gun s 
wtSlheniy and outnumbered t he insurgents by ten to on e> 

' There vas^ttm^^kiimishln^T^t on_tbe 12th of August, ten 
^ days_ainter the capture of the plac^ the Bulgarians made 
som e "sort oT composi tion' vnfR ihe TurK /probably "pa ying 
aj ansom to the Pasha, in retur n fcir which the Bulgaria n 
quarter of the town was spare d. The t roops and Oi e 
bashi'baMtmks compensated themsdvesby fedling merdle ssly 
upon the Vlac^i qiurC^^^ community 
with Greek sympathies. In four days 366 houses and ^3 
shops were burned^ at least 44 men and women, all non* 
combatants, were murdered in the streets (of whom only three 
were Bulgarians) ; some women were violated. The pillage 
both of shops and houses was complete and systematic, and 
hundreds of the citizens were beaten and maltreated. The 
Bulgarians showed little bravery in this affair, and their 
conduct in abandoning the Vlach quarter to be pillaged was 
grossly unchivalrous. The Turks acted after their kind. 
They knew the Greeks too well to fear that even this 1 
massacre of a Phil-hellenic population would affect the 
pro-Turkish policy of the Greeks. Neveska and K lissoura 
were evacuated by the Bulgarians witho ut a stru^le — let us 
hope from a scruple about exposing the inhabitants to a 
vcni4e:incc similar to that which had overtaken Kruchevo. 

Alu)ul Aiijtust 25th Nasir Pasha, who had now t.ikcn over 
the coinni uid from the feeble hands of Omar Kuchcli I^l^ha, 
began to apply a systematic plan of campaign, lie ::>-a 
semi-civilised person who speaks German, aaU hj.^ been 
much employed by the Sultan on spe_cial embassies of 
courtesy in various European capitals. He was fond of 
explaining lhat he modeiled his "methods of barbarism" on 
those which we employed in the Transvaal. His plan was 
to burn all the villages of the revolted Bulgarians, and 
gradually to drive them into corners. He cerlaniiy iiad men 
enough to execute this scheme, and the country in which he 
j had to operate was not really extensive, though very diffi- 
I cult. But the re was always so me ^ap.iaiiis x Q ir (iu nt », 4yiHai? 



1 



Digitized by Google i 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 155 



hitd i in th e timft**^^'^ <^ #»#^P^*s^.^ ^ r»^;rr.^r.fc 
which should have been pursuing the insurgents found it 
more agreeable and intmstin^ to. pillage the jdefenceless 
villages and make war on the women and children. The 
Turks '^*d_ao narfttifi tiiaf th^ bands 

were force d to COnc en^ ^ate^ h ^f* fh<7 always tnans^pd tO 

break thro ugh Jto someless harass ed reg ion . From Aug ust * 
the 25th onwards the insurgents were acting purely on the | • 
defensive. They maintained their ground fairly well 'until 
tHe middle of September^ skirmishing^ incessantly, marching 
and counter-marching, usually evading . the -Tuaks with 
success, but occasionally brought to a general engagement, v 
After_ Septmnber the lighting was very desultory, and on 
: November the 2nd the insurrection was officially declared at . 
an end. In all;the Committee claims that about 150 skirmishes J 
were fought, and in these they mustered anything from 20 
to 600 men. Usually the bands operated in groups of from 
80 to 200 fighting-men. The total casualtiesjof tbeinijurgent 
fighti ng-line in killed and wounded rejichcd 746, which ■ 
amounts to about I5^per cent. — a proportion wjiich suggests 
^ resolute but not exactly. duspjjiiili: lighting. In most of 

these encounters the insurgents must have bcLui uuliium- 
bered byjit leiist tcu lu one, and if the Turks had been even 
respectable marksmen they would have lost very much more 
I severely. They rarely if ever came to close quarters or used .. 
J f the bayonet.. The whole campaign was a game of hide-and- 
seek in which small forces behind rocks and trenches 
exchanged shots with big battalions in the open. The 
bands which kept the field until the end of October achieved 
all the success which they could reasonably have hoped for. 
The climate would hardly have permitted a much more 
extended resistance. A sort of i nforma l armistice permitted 
the bands to dissolve, and not more than a third of the 
armed men were compelled to surrender their rifles. Only 
very small groups, composed of the .more, desperate out- 
laws, remained under arms during the winter, refraining i 
from aggression, satisfied if they could escape capture and 
keep the framework and the spirit of the organisation 
adive. 



I 



Digitized by Google 



156 



MACEDONIA 



To complete Jh[s b£ieLaccount ' of the military aspects of 
the insurrection, it is necessary to refer to the sympathetic 
revolts which occurred elsewhere. There w ^s n ot hing 
approaching a general rising in die Uskub and ^lonica 
Vilayets, but there was an active guerilla mQKfimfint, par- 
ticularly in the Struma valley, which attained its end of 
distracting the attention of the Turk^ and preventing them 
from throwing tlu-ir entire army into the Monastir Vilayet. 
There were also bcveral attempts .upon the railways outside 
the Monastir Province, but these were liardly frequent or 
seriuus enough to be important. The chief effort outside 
Monastir was made in the Vilayet of Adrianople. Adrianople 
(Thrace) is one of the least known re!:jions of Turkey. The 
great part of it is a rich plain inlial ited by Bulgarians and 
Turks, with Greek settlements in the towns and along the 
coast. B ut of th e Bulj^rians of the plain a large propor- 
tion are Moslems (^Pomacks)nris this greater prominence 
or the Mohamedan element which, in a political sense, 
distinguishes Thrace with its great plnin, its rich rose- 
gardens and its tobacco-fields from Macedonia — and Thrace 
begins virtually at Drama. The Christian Slavs of Thrace 
reproduce, I imagme,^ the condition of the piam dwellers of 
Macedonia, who are too poor and too utterly crushed 
beneath the dominion of their Molinmedan ncic^hbonrs to 
be capable of the military hardihood required for an open 
revolt in a country where there are no mountains of refuge. 
There is^ however, a_ highland region to the north- east^ 
forming a triangular wedge between the.Jrontiers of free 
Bulgaria and the Black Sea sJbore^ and here thfi.|ifiasantcy.is 
by majority Christian, and has been able to preserve^ its 
manhood. In this country around the little t owns pf 
Malko-Tirnovo and Kirk-kiliss6 the Committee has long 
been a power. This re^on suff ered as heaviiy as Macedo nia 

* The curious reader may consult the Memorandum of the Internal 
Organisation to which I have already referred. Even as adventure the 
stories which I heard from insur{2;ent officers were seldom very interest- 
ing, turning as thev did only on continual pursuits and escapes. 

* I have never travelled farther cast than Doirao except oy railway, 
and can only write at secood band of the p(^tical conditions which 
prevail in Thrace. 



Digitized by Go 



THii: BULGAiOAN MOVEMENT 157 

during the persecution of 1903; its situation had in fact 
become so uitolLTable, mainly owing to the unchecked 
oppressions.jot the baihi-bcMOuk^. th^t no less tliau^20|0oo 
jx-asants — men, women aod children— a baiidmied their 

, , , ^ ■■ " "" 

iiotnesand their crops duruij^ tlic uiQiitiiii at M^ aud June, 
on the eve of the harvest season, finding a refuge in free 
Bulgaria. In Tlirace, indeed, one finds the Turkish system 
of government in all its native crudity. There are few 
consuls even in the town of Adrianople, and for some 
amazing reason of political selfishness Russia and Austria 
have always refused to permit any extension of the 
Macedonian reforms to this derelict and forgotten region. 
Among these refugees the Committee naturally found the 
material tor bands, and two weeks after the pr oclamatio n of 
the revolt in .Monastir the flag, with its devi ce o f Liberty 
or Death;" was unfurled in the Adnanople V ilayet as well 
(AugusLlSth). The insurrecfIoiiIluiiiivsifi3IHiich t he sam el 
co urse upon a smaller acaie. Road s, bri dges, and telegraph-/ 
lines were destroyed, isolated garrisons were overpowered, ( 
the ba6hi-bazouks driven into flight or a show ot meeiyiess, 
an3 for two or three wee ks the wh ole of tbii?. highland 
regforT^vas in_ljie hands of the insurge nts. They showed 
little enterprise, however, and no attenapl..waa_Ji^de tol 
capture the lowii ol_Majko-Tirnovo. The Greeks of tha 
coast were thrown into a panic, and imagined that the 
Bulgarians intended to massacre them. The^ insurgents 
numbered, so far as I can ascertain, some 1,200 men, and 
had only. ^6 meja_kilkd_ .aad . WQUodfid. A 'relatively 
enormous Turkish force was ultimately drafted into the 
Vilayet (it is said 40,000 men), rather with the object of 
menacing Bulgari a than o f crushing a rebellion so incon- 
sideiable. This movement had no miiiiary interest, but for 
a moment there seemed a bare chance of an exciting 
complication. On August the 3rd the Russian Consul of 
Monastir, M. Ro-^tkovsky, an enterprising but violent man, 
who could never remember that an Albanian Moslem has a 
fiercer sense of personal honour than a Russian peasant, 
struck a gendarme who had omitted to salute him, and was 
murdered on tiie spot This was the second iataiity within 



Digitized by Google 



MACEDONIA 



four months among the Russian Consular Staff in Macedonia 

(the first affair being the assassination of M. Sterbina at 

Mitrovitza), and obviously it could not be passed over 

lightly. No one thought of demanding the punishment of 

the ru£&ans who were responsible for the massacres at 

Smerdesh and Monastir, but, as a Macedonian once remarked 

to me, "European blood is <lear." Russia called for the 

dismissal of the Vali, the hanging of the murderer, and the 

punishment of several other scapei^^oats. To give more 

weight to her claims, the Black Sea ilcct was put in motion 

and appeared in Iniada Bay off the Thracian coast, at the 

moment when the insurrection was at its height. The 

rebels were naive enough to imagine that this coincidence 

had some bearinj^s upon their own sufferings and their own 

hopes, and snmeiiow failed to understand the sublime 

mental dut u hiin ih of a Tsar who was capable at this 

supreme moment in the history of his kinsmen, the 

Southern Slavs, of sending his fleet to their shores with 

no other object than to mark his displeasure at the death of 

one of his consuls in a private and rather sordid brawl. But 

so it was. I The fleet lay at anchor, watched the flames of 

burning villages and beacon tires unmoved, and when a 

wretched 'gendarme had been hanged in Monastir sailed 

quietly home. Soon after its departure bci^nn the pliase of 

massacre and devastation, but that development had no 

interest for the masters of the world's navies. 

« * » » « 

The insurrection of rgoi was, however, very mucli more 
than an active military movement. It was also a passive 
demonstration in which the whole village population 
shared, men, women, and children. The casualties of the 
fighting-line were relatively small. It was the non-comba- 
tants who bore the full weight of their masters' wrath, and 
their miseries, losses, and privations, endured with stohd 

* ** The first Secrefatfy ol the Russian Embassy came this morning to 

inform me that the Russian fleet would proceed to Iniada, but that its 
entrv into Turkish waters was only intended to accentuate the gravity 
with winch his Government regard the murder of the Russian Consul, 
and was not otherwise connected with the ataatioa cf affairs in 
Macedonia " (Blue-Boole, Cd. 1875, p. 373). 



Digitized by Google 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 159 



courage and unfaltering resolution, were a sacrifice to the 
ideal of liberty rarely paralleled beyond the confines of 
Turkey. It was not lightly risked or incurred in ignorance. 
A people which determines to revolt against the Turks 
knows very well what fate it challenges. There are 
memories and precedents enough to warn the peasants. 
The Bulgarians have not forgotten the massacre at Batak 
which preceded the liberation of Bulgaria. Xhfi-A£n}enian 
horrors made a profound impre§§.ion_ even in Macedonia. 
And lest it should have been supposed that the Turks had 
grown milder or more timid, t here was the recent object- 
lessoq of s;ii^prHp<;h Evcry vill a ge which joined the revolt 
did so with the knowledge that i t might be b urned to. the 
ground, pillaged to the last blanket and the last chicken, 
and its population decimated in tlie process. That the. 
Macedonians voluntarily fac ed th ese danger s is a proo f of 
their desperation. Life had lost its value to them and 
peace its meaning. In many of the districts . which levolted 
the peasants had so little doubt of what was in store for 
them ThaTl hey abandoned thejr yillag.e.sia^^.t)ody on. the 
first day of the insurrection. The_young men joined 
their bands accompanied by a few women, who vyent to 
bake fbr^hem, and in some cases by the women-teachers 
of the town schools, who were organised as nurses for the 
wounded. The older men, tlic_\v^ni£ii^.aiid_ihe- children 
sought refuge iiithe mountains and the woods. They took 
with them as much food as they could carry, drove their 
beasts before them, and buried their small possessions. The 
sick and the aged frequently remained behind, imagining that 
their weakness would appeal to the chivalry of the troops. 
As early as the second day of the rising the fate of the 
village of Krusje (near Resna) served as a warning against 
delay. Tt was pillaged and burned .to the ground with the 
usual incidents of murder and violation. In most of the 
insurgent zones the non-combatant population came 
together under the direction of the Committee and formed 
great camps in inaccessible situations. Temporary shelters 
were constructed from the branches of the trees, ovens 
du g in Ih fi, £arth. and all the normal life of a Bulgarian 



Digitized by Google 



i6o 



MACEDONIA 



village reproduced as Iv at the drcamttanoes would 
permit 

But not all tlie viU^ populations fled when tfie tnBomo- 
tion broke out Tliere was Neocasi, a poor Bulgarian 
lianilet on the phun not far from Fiorina. Ftcm it only 
a lew of the younger men had joined the bands. When the 
Turks swooped down upon it they were not content with 
tsnming it Thej snmmoned tiie men together under the 
pretext of marching them as prisoners to Fiorina. On the 
road half-way they halted and massacred tiiem at leisore and 
in cold blood, to the number of over sixty, for the crime of 
being the fathers of insurgent sons. It is said that some 
were tortured before they died, and others were made to 
stand in files that the soldiers might experiment with their 
rifles to see how many a single bullet would kill. Three 
days later it was the turn of Armensko, a village in the 
valley that leads up from Fiorina to the pass of Pisoderi. 
Its population is Slav in blood and speech, but it belongs to 
the Greek party and took no share in the Bulgarian 
movement. The troops under Haireddin Bimbashi, the 
butcher of Smerdesh, had been defeated by a numerous 
body of insurgents on the mountains above Armensko. 
They were rL'trcatinLl;, anL!;ry and embittered, on Fiorina, and 
Armensko lay in tlieir path. Its Greek priest went out to 
meet and welcome them and was murdered m the road, 
and then the horde .swept down upon the unprepared and 
deienceless village. They pillaged and burned, and 
sati:>iied their brutal lusts undisturbed by any fear of 
resistance. Nearly all the wounded, many of them women 
and young children, who were brought in iittei wards to the 
Greek Hospital in Monastir, were hacked and hewn with 
bayonets and swords. Sixty-eight of the villagers wcvc 
massacred, and ten women and eight girls violated. There is 
European evidence for outrages that are almost unprmtable 
— but, after all, what Europe is prepared to tolerate Europe 
must not be too nice to hear. Several wounded women 
who managed to crawl out of their burmng houses were 
afterwards caught as they lay dying, and violated repeatedly 
until they expired.' I was told by a Turkish officer who 

' See Blue-Book, Cd. 1875, p. 319. , 



Digitized by Google 



I 



. THE BULGARIAN MOVliMENT i6i 

mi engaged in these punithre operations that the troops 
had fomal orders, ^ich came, so Aey understood, dir^ 
from the Sultan himself, to bum all Plages whose inhabi- 
tants had fled, but to spare the rest. The positive order 
they obeyed, the negative command tiiey frequently forgot 
The result was that if the inhabitants of a viUage awaited 
the troops they risked the fate of Neocasi and Armensko ; if 
they fled, their homes were infallibly destroyed. It was a 
choice between having your village burned or having it 
burned and being massacred as well. Most viUagers 
preferred the lesser evil and took to the mountains, 
becoming theretiy rebels by definition. A few object-lessons 
soon taught the peasants to flee betimes, and during the 
later phases of the insurrection the carnage in the villages 
was confined chiefly to the aged and the sick. The 
stragglers and the dilatory were often cut off before they 
had quitted their homes, and the bed-ridden were frequently 
burned alive where they lay. No village escaped entirely from 
this tribute^ and the number of murdered non-combatants 
varied from threes and fours to fifties and sixties. Dymbeni 
and Kossenets, for example, large villages in the Gastoria 
district, lost, each of them, dose on sixty innocent lives. 

The life of the refugee population, which soon Dumbered 
dose on 60,000 souls^ grouped in some dozen camps among 
the mountains, passed through three distinct phases, so for 
as I can reconstruct it During the hot weather of flie first 
two or three weeks of August they must have lived in 
relative comfort and plenty, rejoicing in their brief freedom, 
welcoming as heroes the bands which came and went^ 
hailing their successes, and debating every wild rumour 
of the aid that was to come from Europe or from Russia. 
Then came a second period of perhaps two weeks during 
which fliey still enjoyed relative security, had food to ea^ 
and did not suffer grievously from cold even on the 
mountain-sides. But down below them their villages 
were burning. They heard no longer wild tales of glorious 
victories, but rumours of massacre and tortur^.< The 

* Tlic most nsnal tale of horror was that on one occasion or another 
the Turks burned men and children alive, ge&eraliy in bakers' ovens. 



i 



Digitized by Google 



l62 



MACEDONIA 



sound of firing haunted tfaemp and it often happened 
that some young woman who had ventured back to the 
deserted vlUage to see what was left of her home or to 
visit the hiding-place where she had concealed her gala 
dresSi returned no more, or, it may be, crept back to die, 
WQunded and dishonoured. Lads herding the sheep of the 
refugees were caught if they ve>?tm^ dnwn the valley s, 
andsoinetimes hungiy children straying to the maize 
fields would return speechless and stricken in mind. _Th e 
final stage c ould_ not be lon g dels^yed. Th^ MrAna^ 
^tightened their grip around the mount ains, and from 
ithelr 'eyries the peasants wpuld .suddenly become aware 
p£ red sbrisUcs upon the green foothills, or catdi on the 
Wind the shouts of drivera tir gin g the pa ck -animate which 
^rrted the mountain-gu ns that wen^ Jq shc U tf^eir place 

pf refuse. iPmni miH-Sfpfpn^P^ ♦h^ fiigitiOT>ft 

} Ixreire^ hunted ifrpm„ forest to mountain and from peak to 
l^eak. Their only, s^Cety jy^^to-fojlow the now concen- 
trated bands, and sometimes , the battle. raged .about the 
iair where the women and children lay, the men fighting 
with dil theicjnaahood. ta 'j^f^'* chaiir^tp ^ceacbt 
knowing that behind them cowered wife and child expect- 
ing massacre if their courage failed or their buUets missed 
the mark. F leeing incessantly^ they soon left behind feem 
their stores of food and their herds of beasts. They were 
now sh^lterl^, under colder skie§. There jtfitfi_jfillages 
which lived for days together on roots and salad g rasses. 
The younger children died in great numbers^ and men and 
women graduated for the epidemics which were to decimate 
those whom the Turks had spared. Often the big camps 
broke up into scattered groups of starving and terrified 
fugitive, who returned at last to make their submission 
among the ashes of their homes. It sometimes happened 
that these fell in with prowling soldiers or marauding 
bashi'bazouks. Fifteen villagers, for example, from Bouno 
(near Resna), trudging, with their priest at their head, 

I cnuld never come across an eye-witness, however, and in one instance 
inquiry showed that a wounded insurgent chief, whose dead body the 
Turks did burn, had committed suicide to avoid capture. 



Digitized by Go 




Google 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 163 



towards the town, were massacred without distinction of 
age or sex. The younger women fared the worst, for, 
when the troops could catch them, they were often carried 
off to the Turkish camps and there kept for some days until 
the last brute who desired them had had his will. Many 
were shot while they sheltered behind the insurgents during 
the latter skirmishes of September and October, and some- 
times the same bullet wounded a mother and her baby.* 
It was the impossibility of feeding and protecting the 
refugees which compelled the leaders to proclaim the 
insurrection at an end with the close of October ; for the 
weather was still relatively mild (indeed, to us who Ccunc 
direct from England it seemed wai in), though to be sure 
the mountains were already snow-clad, even on their lower 
heights. The Turks had made war upon tiie \\'omen and 
children, and the men dared not prolong the unequal con- 
flict with starvation. By the fir^.t week of November the 
population of the revolted districts had once more settled 
down, pa.rt of it on the sites of the ruined villages, part of it 
among friendly neii^h hours who had saved their roofs. 
Long before November the towns were crowded with 
helpless masses of starving women, who begged their 
bread from door to door, clamoured about the portals 
of tlie Bishops' palaces, and slept m the aljancioned and 
ruined houses which abound in every Macedonian town. 
It was at this stage that we first saw the condition of the 
returning villai^ers with our own eyes. Those who had 
found a roof beneath which to slielter m some friendly 
Village were in an enviable case. They iiad lost everything 
indeed — crops, home, cattle, and household gear. They 
lived on the charity of neighbours, who as often as not 
had themselves been robbed. I'liey owned nothing but 
tlie tattered summer <:;arments m which they had fled 
three months before. Tiicy had neither blankets nor 

* One case of this kind wc treated in our Ochrida hospital. It is fair 
to cite the contrary instances. One woman who had been shot by 
accident hi the gciicial tubilladc when tlic Uoops ^u^lied her village 
was kindly treated by the Turks, who gave her bread and water. I 
once saw a Turkish officer (after the insurrection) give his coat aad 
gloves to a wounded Bulgu-ian woman. But such chiiradry was rare* 



i 



Digitized by Google 



4 



i64 MACEDONIA 

winter cloaks. At least there was still a thatch between 
them and the rain. But the majority were camped among 
their ruins, busied during the last warm days of the 
autumn in clearing away the rubble from some corner 
of their homes and erecting some sort of *'lcan-to" of 
wood and straw against a crumbling wall. Nothing but 
a photograph could convey an idea ot the devastation. 
The villages were mere heaps of charred wood and 
blackened stone, buried beneath a red dust which the 
rain convt rted into mud. A few walls still stood upright, 
the only hope for the winter. Where the churches had 
not been burned they were riddled with bullets, blackened 
with bivouac fires, pillaged, dishonoured, and defiled with the 
ordure of a camp. The wells were sometimes buried under 
the debris of fallen houses, and in one case at least pol^oned 
with llic carcases of beasts. The mills, like the houses, 
had hctn burned, their dams broken down, the machinery 
destroyed, and even their stones in some cases shivered 
into fragments. Of the horses and oxen which the peasants 
owned, even alter the authorities had professed to recover 
the loot, not one in four remained. 01 the sheep and other 
small beasts and the poultry I doubt if one in ten was h it. 
Even the ploughs were burned or stolen. It was rarely, too, 
that a family recovered the clothing and utensils which it 
buried before its flight — the bashi-hazouks had the knack 
of hnding spoil. Of the harvest most villages saved sutiicient 
for four or six weeks, while a few m the upland places 
where the ripe crops had been left ungarnered had enoui^h 
for three months at most. But more harrowing than the 
material ruin was the moral desolation. Women would 
stand on a frosty day, their breasts bnre, their feet naked 
upon the icy ground, oblivious of cold and hunger, sobbing 
out some tale of how thty had seen the dear head of son or 
husband beaten in before their eyes by soldier or /ur///- 
hazoiih. Not less to be pitied were the young men who 
had laid down their arms and returned to find neither wife 
nor home. I think of one whose case seemed to me a tuU 
world of commonplace miseries. He was a mason who 
worked in Coostantinople to keep a iaxnily in a village near 



Digitized by Google I 




Google 



THE BUIjGARIAN MOVEMENT 165 



Resna. He was driven out ot the capital, with all his 
countrymen, early in the spring, nncl rcturn^-cl home With 
an empty inuaey-belt. Three mouths of idleness f(^>llo\vcd, 
and, whin the lot fell upon hnn, he went out with the 
village band. His wife was struck by a soldier, and died in 
premature child-birth. The lather cared for the baby as 
best he could, but he could find no work, and he came to 
us begging that we would provide milk to save the life 
of the ailing child. The quick horror of painful deaths 
seemed less moving than this succession of everyday 
troubles, each due to some political catastrophe or some 
national hate. Nor was the misery at an end when the 
insurrection ceased. Hundreds of men were in gaol or 
in exile in some distant Armenian town, and, as the months 
went by, the ill-spelt missives, without date or signature, 
began to arrive, which told how one village leader after 
another had died of typhus on the way to Diarbekir. 
There were other troubles too, more secret and more 
horrible, which would come to our ears through some 
kindly doctor who used his skill, where the rnrks would 
allow it, among the village folk. Two young giris, 
for example, in a single village, who had passed some 
days and nights of shame in a Turkish camp, at 
last gave wav to inadness as they realised that they 
must become mothers. And all the while amid the 
degradation and the suffering, the sickness, and the fear 
of famine, there weighed upon this defeated people the 
sense that all its sacrifice had been in vain. The Turks 
had triumphed ; Europe was still heedless and uncon- 
cerned ; Macedonia was still enslaved ; and we, who were 
doling out our blankets and our flour among them, were 
only keepmg them alive to endure iresh oppressions and 
further shame.< 

' The statistics of the devtstitioo can have iitde meaning to those 

who did not see it, but they deserve none the less to be cited. One 
hnndrcd rtnd nineteen \'i!la[^?s in the Monastir Province were wholly 
or puilialiy buriicd. iiiglil thousand four hundred houses were de* 
Stn^d. Between fifty and sixty thonmid persons were rendened 
liornclc The n imber of murdered non-combatants can hardly have 
been less than til teen hundred. For these figures I can vouch. I add 



Digitized by Google 



MACEDONIA 



The first surprise was that this population rose at all, and 
rose en ma$$e» The second surprise, to my thinking more 
startilog than the first, was that all the sufferings of the 
autumn produced no reaction whatever against the Com- 
mittee or its leaders. The peasantry remained loyal to the 
orgianisation which plunged it in all this misery. Among 
the ashes of comfortable villages^ or in the wards of the 
hospitals where the Relief Society had gathered the 
wounded women and children, there were moments when 
one felt tempted to curse the whole idea of insurrection, 
to think that no provocation could justify a population 
in facing such risks, to doubt whether any gain in freedom 
could warrant the mere physical paiii involved in winning 
it. But these were an outsider's reflections. They seldom 
entered the heads of the Macedonians themselves. One 
heard no recriminations, no blame of the Committee, 
no regrets for an apparently wasted effort. In the hospital 
in Castoria the patients in the men's ward, recovering 
slowly from diseases mdiiced bv hard ship and exposure, 
would talk almost gaily of their future plans and of the 
struggle they meant to renew so soon as health and spring- 
time should brinL[ the opportunity. In Ochrida, where 
abject poverty and the tyranny of the Albanians has made 
the Bulgarian villagers peculiarlv spiritless, ignorant, and 
degraded, 1 have known even old men declare that should 
the Committee give the order to march onci^ more in the 
summer they would unhesitatinglv obey. Nor was this 
attitude altot^ether difficult to explain. CciUuries of op- 
pression have schooled the Bulgarians to suffer. They 
scarcely discuss the motives of their oppressors. The 
idea that the Turk is naturally ^av age and that their own 
lot is to suffer is engraved on ilieir minds. Women would 

the totals for the whole of Macedonia and Adrianoplc, whic h the 
Bulgarians collected. I cannot verify them, but probably they are 
not mach exaggerated — indeed, the ligores for lloinsiir pabUshed in 

Sofia were sometimes less than those which I collected while making 
out relief lists in the villages. The total number of houses burned is 
given as ij,zii ; of homeless persons about 70,000 ; of refugees driven 
from Macedonia and Adrianoplc into Bolg^via, 30,000 ; of violatUuiB, 
3,008: and of women and g^-U taken captive, 176; of personi 
impnson^i 1,500. 



Digitized by Google 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 167 



speak with as much indignation about the death of their 

mcn-iolk killed in battle as about any murder of non-' 
combatants. They have given up all attempt to understand 
the Turks. Each fresh loss, provoked though it may have 
been by their own act, is simply added to their memory of 
age-long miseries. They liave ceased to reabon or reflect. 
They can only suffer and resent. The rift between the 
two races is so profound that I doubt whether even a 
wholehearted and inteUigent attempt at concili;ition on 
the Turkish side, were such a thing possible, couid bring 
the smallest improvement. 

The more one learned to know of the Bulgarians of 
Macedonia, the more one came to respect their patriotism 
and courage. These are no flamboyant or picturesque 
virtues ; they have grown up in a soil of serfdom among 
a reserved and unimaginative race. They are consistent 
with compromise and with prudence. There is some- 
thing aiiiiust furtive in their manifestations. And yet 
when the Bulgarian seems most an opportunist and a 
time-server, he still cheriblies Ins faith in the future of 
his people, and still works for its realisation. He has 
no great past to lK):ist of, no glorious present to give 
him courage. He dc^es not flaunt his nationality like 
the Greek, or clanu an imagined superiority. He will 
risk no needless persecution for the pure joy of calling 
himself by the name of his ancestors. I knew one 
energetic organiser of revolt who pused before the 
authorities as a Greek, made a pilgrimage to Athens to 
give colour to his proiessions, and returned with litho- 
graphs of the Hellenic Royal Family with whicii he 
decorated his walls. Villages will shift their allegiance 
from the Greek to the Bulgarian Church twice or thrice 
in a year — one must watch how the wind blows," 
to quote their saying — but under every disguise they remain 
obstinately Buli^arian at heart. I have even heard a 
Bulgarian Bishop txplammg that he had advised certain 
villages to transfer themselves to the Greek (Patriarchist) 
Church in order to distract the suspicion^ of the authorities. 

The same strain of prudence was evident in the military 



Digitized by Google 



f 

I 



1 68 MACEDONIA 

I conduct of the revolt The kadcfs rarely challenged a 
g^neial e ngagement Th^} Aa^iy ^nf^n^cmi xeh^ aur^^r- 

prisesjn uilid i lar^e hands of jnanr ggnfa nwtrpnwered 
much smaller de^hments of regularB. Wh^i^ battle did, 
taSe pkce^^-au^' for examp le^ in the mout^^yna of Peristc ri 
in Octobar<--7Turiush officers nrhn irnr prmrnt hnrt iritnmr! 
to* the splendid oMinacy of ^ft Pqlgaiiw* *fiiitjtbnr 
tactics were eeldom^aggressive. They never attempted to 
^orm'a hri^ge aisaiost cannon, as the AlbanlaiLSifi^^ 
did in the spring of 1903 at Mitroyitza. T hey waged a 
guerill a warfare, enduring_2mmense f atigues" and y eat 
pnvaGbnSy contenFto wiKwy and b aflfl e the Tu r ks in an 
endless i^ursuit. 'T "Eave 'often asked ez*insurgents what 

' t&^l&bught of their chiefs. The answer was always the 
same. They gaVe the palm to Tdiaksd^ff.fpr_Uie signi- 
ficant reason t hat du ring the whdiejampdgn he 
ten of_^s JmeiT And~yet^!Hese" nien, whe n the occ asion 
came to t hrow their lives away for any definite purp ose, 
were'capable o7 an ujterly_reckless heroism. Xhfi— Cppi- 

. mittee neveif l(5ufi<rTjifficulty_in obtaining Y^^untemf or. 
I such work 's» nurilng, hriH£^.iiwftrlrin|^ nr ^VM«l|,H|rftTOngyl| 

which lnvplyed_ alm ost certain de ath. Education among 
the Bulgalrians^ so far from weakening the primitive tribal 
instinct of self-sacrifice, seems only to intensify it, instead 
of softening it with hwnanitarian scruples. In estimating 
their courage it is not enou^ to measure fheir military 
achievements. The real proof of courage is that they rose 
at all— these peasants accustomed to cringe befm the 
meanest Turk, schooled to endure insults and floggings 
without a prospect of revenge, with no tradition of revest to 
inspire them, no military knowledge, no soldierly past to 
give them confidence. The measure of their courage is 
the risk they ran. There is short shrift for the wounded on 
a Turkish battlefield, and few adles return from banishment 
Without this steadfast and resolute capacity for suffering, 
this plodding, if furtive, patriotism, this somewhat passive 
courage, the Bulgarians could never have nude their Com- 
mittee. Yet another quality was necessary— loyalty— and 
this^ too, they possess. They have no hi^y developed 



Digitized by Google | 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 169 

flense of pereonal honcniri at the Albanians have— -lor that 
a race must have carried arms and known no master. They 
neither love truth for its own sake nor scorn a meanness 
from self-respect. But some fellow-feeling, some sense of 
tmtfaerhood, keeps them true. There are few secrets in 
the intimate common life of the village. Every one knows 
who is the Ck>mmittee'8 agent, who harbours the wandering 
outlaws^ who has a store of dynamite or of rifles buried in 
his yard. Most amazing of all is the ease with which the 
leaders of the revolution can travd unscathed from end to 
end of Macedonia. The villager who has grasped Sarafoffa 
hand will tdl afterwards of his great experience, as a 
Scottish clansman might have t>oasted that he had seen 
Prince Charlie. All through the winter that followed the 
insurrection, Damian Groueff, the President of the Supreme 
Macedonian Committee, the real chief of the movement, 
and the organiser of the campaign, hibernated in a village 
not many miles from Monastir. The secret must have 
been the common property of thousands, and not one of 
them seems to have thought of selling it. In the spring 
M. Groueff actually entered Monastir itself, lodged in a 
Bulgarian house, and moved freely about in streets that 
swarm with soldiers, police, and spies. His presence was 
generally known to the Bulgarians of the place ; but, despite 
the fact that a price had been placed on his head, not a 
man among them was found to prefer riches to loyalty. 
Nor was this an isolated occurrence. The insurj^ent chiefs 
constantly venture not only into Monastir but even into 
Salonica, yet no single instance of treason has ever been 
known to occur. When one compares this unilorm 
iiniiianity from treason with the history of Irish cuii- 
spiraciu.>, troiii the ci iys of Wolfe Tone to the I'licenix Park 
murders, one is forced to admit that somewhere bei^eath 
the awkward reserve ol the Bulgarian character there lies 
a fund oi loyally and steadf;;st faith more reiiabie than 
any picturesque or feudal chivahy. 

I confess that I have sumctiiiies wavered in my judgment 
of the Maceduiiian Committee. Fresh troiu Europe, and 
plunged suddenly into a world where men hght savagely 



Digitized by Google 



170 



MACEDONIA 



for ideals whtcfai to us who liave achieved them, seem 
reverend and sacred, it is hard to believe that freedom can 
be won by methods which include so much of terrorism 
and assassination. Amid all the horrors of an insurrection 
that has failed, one asks whether these abstract political 
conceptions of self-^government and nationality are worth 
the tears of a widow or the shame of a maid. But as the 
months go by one understands that these simple things of 
daily life, the right to plough in peace and reap in security, 
to marry without dishonour and rear children who need 
not cringe, can only be attained by a sweeping political 
change* Returned to Europe, it seems no less clear among 
the comfort and ignorance of a nation busted with the 
affairs of half the earth, that the wretched corner of 
Europe which agonises forgotten beyond the Balkans can 
only hope to rouse us to our duties by the violent means of 
open revolt, which in fact it has adopted. If one shrinks 
from the despotism which the Committee exerts, this also 
is true, that the people themselves control it, and the people 
themselves submit to a sacrifice which is necessary if they 
are to achieve their end by conspiracy and rebellion. In 
making a temporary sacrifice of their liberty they are giving 
up what they do not possess— and giving it up in the hope 
of winning it. Lastly, if the recklessness with which the 
Committee destroys life and risks it seems shocking, let us 
remember tiiat life has no worth or price in Macedonia, 
We in Europe talk of life as though it had an absolute 
value. In fact its value is relative to the degree of security 
which a given society affords. It would be interesting 
to inquire what premium an English insurance company 
would ask upon the life of the average Macedonian 
villager. 

The Bulgarians of Macedonia are to be judged not by 
the standard of morality and civilisation which in fact 
they have attained, but by their courage and their deter- 
mination in striving for better ttiin^. The history of their 
ten years' struggle is their title to our sympathy. If they 
lack some of the dignified and gracious vuiues which their 
Albanian neighbours possess, let us remember that the 



Digitized by Google 




Google 



THE BULGARIAN MOVEMENT 171 



honour of the Albanian stands rooted in unfaithfulness. 
He renounced his reUgion, and received as his reward the 
right to bear himself erect, to carrv weapons and to hector 
it, an overman amid a race of serfs. The Bulgarian held 
to the faith which the centuries had bequeathed to hmi, 
bowed himself to his daily task and his habitual sufTerin^ts, 
learned to lie before men that he might be true to God, and 
acquired the vices of a siave that he might keep the virtues 
of a martyr. 



Thb Rival ComitmBs. (See p. laa) 

To avoid complications I have written of the Committee as though 
it were a single organisatioii. The differenoes amooff its rival seetioiis 

absorb much attention in Sofia, but in Macedonia tncy are little felt, 
and they scarcely concern the outside world. The so-called " Central" 
Committee has virtually uo footing in Macedonia, and its feuds with 
the main body have little effect beyond the Bulgarian frontier. This 
*' Ccntri'.'^t " party is rather a Bulgarian than a Macedonian organisa- 
tion. lis leader is General Tzon<3iefi, a retired soldier with a gallant 
record, whose political talents are no^ I think, as oonspicQOOs as his 
militaiy qualities. He is an intimate of Prince Ferdinand, and this 
fact is enough to discredit him in the eyes of the Macedonians, who 
arc convinced, I know not with what justice, that the 1 'rmcc cares very 
much more for his dynastic interests than for the liberties of Mac^ 
donia. General T/.onchcffs lieutenant, Colonel Yankoff, is simply a 
brave guerilla chief. M. Micbailuf:iky, a poet and a Professor, of 
History, who is the nominal head of uits party, is not a Macedonian, 
and impressed me as an eloquent dreamer. 

Rather more important is the tendency directed by M. Sar;ifoff. He 
was originally a meuibci ui tne T^ouchcH^Michailofsky section, but he 
baa broken with his former alUeSp and now belongs to the Internal 
Orcranisation, in which he may be said to lead the left wing. His 
influence makes for rash deciaimis and violent methods. He stands, 
indeed, to the main body of tiie revolotionary party modi as the less 
intellectual anarchists used to stand towards the orthodox Socialists in 
the days of the '* International." When they arc for regular warfare 
he is for dynamite. When they believe in a truce he is apt to kick over 
the traces. Bat his importance is very much exaggerated in Europe. 
He is certainlv a picturesque personality, yonng, magnetic, and adven- 
turous. A whole cyclus of legends has gaUiered about him. His name 
is a terror to the Turks, who see him in hiding behind every rock, and 
catch him perpetnally in tho weirded disguises. He has the valuable 
gift of being everywhere at once T never understood how this was 
managed, until i read in a London paper tiiat he had purchased 
a mcwor-car, in which he dashes over the frontier and makes his 
raids into Turkey ! To a man wVo can drive a motor car over the 
Kilo iTFWintP'TV^ and along Turkish roads no miracle is impossible. 



Digitized by Google 



172 



MACEDONIA 



M. Sarafoff understands the uses of advertisement, and hh fame is dear 
to the sensation il jnnrnaHst. But in Macedonia he is merely the rather 
irrespoubibic uiiy 01 iuuch stronger men. The real brain of the revolt 
is Damian GfOoeff, the President of the Internal Organisation, wliose 
name, I suppose, is quite unknown beyond the Balkans. He thinks in 
yearsj while M. Saratoli sees no further than to-morrow s newspaper, 
and spends his iRinters among the Macedonian villages, while the 
heroes of the movement are posing in Paris and London. It is a pity 
that M. Sarafoff has captivated the journalistic imagination, f'^r he 
represents evcryliung tiiat is bloody and unscrupulous in the wai of 
liberatioa. BuC indeed^ the school of thought which one encotinters 
among the con- pirators who take their ease in Sofia is not representa- 
tive Of the real Macedonians. I once met a Balkan Tartarin. who edits 
a paper in Sofia^why was not Taitarin a joumalirt?'*— who assored 
me that the Committee was about to poison the water-supply of various 
European capitals with the bacillus of the plague. I ought to have 
laughed, but politeness restrained me, and I protested instead. 
Tartarin looked surprised, and then remarked, "Mais vons etes on 
homme civilise." The genuine Macedonian is too anxio i- to be 
civilised to make a speech like that, and too much in earnest to play 
with sctiemes iliat may amuse the secure leisore of the parasites of tlie 
movement. 

Of recents developments it is difficult to write with confidence at a 
distance. I suspect that the tendency to internal schism among the 
Bulgarian organisations has become more marked than it was. My 
impression is that the Centralists are somewhat stronger than they 
v/^Gf and more bent than ever on separate action, while M. Sarafott is 
less closely identified with the Interior Organisation and more neaaly 
the chief of a distinct ttiinl parly. Thera was some hghting in Mace- 
donia during the somiiier ol 1905 anuN^g the bands U Uiese rival 
societies. 

As these pages are passing through the press, the news arrives that 

the two rival committees have been reconciled, and have arnil::^iinated 
under the joint leadership of M. Grouc££ and General Xsonchetf* 



Digitized by Google 



i 



CHAPTER VI 



THE VLACHS 

nnHE rood Imiii Fiorina to Castoria sets out, like so 
many Turkish institutioiis, with excellent intentions. 
Once in the remote past it was evidently carefully made or 
at least elaborately planned. If we stumbled— on that 
first journey in mid-December — it was over the ribs of its 
foundations. If we floundered, it was among the heaps of 
stone flung down, in the highway, with the laudable fore- 
thought that some day they might be pressed and broken 
into good macadam. And if there was a difficulty in 
crossing the countless little torrents that traverse its 
course, that was chiefly because the fragments of what 
was once a bridge lay athwart the path and compelled 
us to milkc a circuit. (There i^, inclt'cd, :i trarlitioii still 
current among the valley folk a happy tunc when it 
was possible to ni;ike the journey in a wheeled conveyance.) 
The rocid twisted and climbed — above the liclcl-— above 
the woods — and into the snow-^. Night fell, and we 
stumbled on by ^tarhght and the blue hazy gleam that 
came from the snow across the pass. Far down in the 
valley behind us glimmered the only sign of liunian life — 
a shepherd's watch-fire, while the tiakhng of a sheep-bell 
added its music to the crisp yielding of the snows beneath 
our horses' hoofs. One could conceive no spot more 
desolate than this uninhabitable mountain, with the climate 
of an Alpine summit. To reach it seemed an adventure, 
to live upon it a daily heroism. We were wondering what 
precarious gain, what passion for the free lite of the hills 
induced that herdsman to pass his life among the precipices 

173 



Digitized by Google 



174 



MACEDONIA 



and the snows^ ^riien with a sudden bend and dip in the 
road a score of village dogs were barking round our feet 
We were in the Vladh vilhge of FSsod^. 

Stumbling up a wooden ladder which led from the 
reeking stable of the vtUage khan (inn) to the guest* 
chamber above it^ tbe kindly accents ol Greek voices 
received us. It was a miserable little room, dirty, uncom- 
fortable, and cramped, but the two young men who 
occupied it suggested, somehow, a stage of civilisation 
which we hardly expected to encounter in a herdsman's 
villa^ on a mountain>top. One was reading a book — 
rarest of all si^ts in Macedonia — while the other was 
playing something European upon a genuine violin. The 
book turned out to be Tricoupis* History of the Greek War 
of Independence," a ponderous and by no means popular 
worl^ modelled in manner and language upon Thucydides, 
while the two young men proved to be the schoolmasters 
of the vilhge. Presently the village authorities arrived, 
and led us forth from our temporary refuge^ and after 
a perilous voyage among the morasses and precipices 
round which the village seemed to be built we were 
installed in the headman's house, and there again, to eyes 
accustomed to the squalor and misery of Bulgarian 
hamlets, the surroundings breathed of distant civilisations. 
The floors were boarded, the walls were papeied, and on 
them hung a map of Europe as though to remind the 
children iidio played around it that Macedonia belongs 
by right to the Western world of enlightenment and 
h^edom. We dined at a table and sat on chairs— amazing 
innovations— and presently we were to meet the priest cl 
the place» who actually boasted the possession of a little 
library. Drowsy and tired, overcome by the surprising 
comfort of the blazing yule-log and the well-stuffed 
mattresses stretched before the fire, after the long climb 
through the snow and the bitter air of the hills, I remember 
that I fell asleep, while the children spread the table and 
prepared the meal. Half waking, half dreaming, there 
rang in my ears the bafiBing music of some tongue as 
familiar as one's schoolroom. The bread wfaidi the 



Digitized by 



THE VLACHS 



175 



children put on the table was pati, the doo over whicli they 
stumbled was can. It sticiucd as though we had crossed 
centuries as well as mountains, and found a Roman camp 
within this fastness of the snows and mists. 

The morning light only mcreased the puzzle. It was 
a little village roughly bnill ni undressed stone, as untidy, 
as careless of foim as any Bulgarian hamlet. It had, they 
told me, no more than one hundred and tiltv houses, and 
a population of some eij^ht hundred souls. One noticed 
no fields around it, and indeed it would have needed a 
more than Waliachian enterprise to till these mountain- 
tops, all craL; and stone. Flocks it possessed and wood and 
water, but it owed nothing else to natiuL'. One mi'^ht 
have expected a grnulmg poverty, the struggle ot a savage 
and degenerate race to wring a bare subsistence from the 
hillside, eked out perliaps bv hri^.mclage and plunder. 
But these people had, on the contrary, an air of comfort 
and plenty. In the nnd^t cjf the straggling village a large 
and ambitious buddmg was m course of erection. It is to 
be a secondary school, with five teachers for the boys and 
three lor the girls. It seems a startling provision for this 
minute community. Hut these Vlach villages arc but 
nurseries aiul eyries built among the rocks, where a keen- 
witted r lee is trained, which makes its career as far afield 
as the Greek and Roumanian kuiguages are spoken. 
There is a little Pisoderi in Macedonia, where the aged 
repose and the children grow, but the greater Pisoderi is 
in Ronniania and in Egypt, where lortunes are to be made 
in trtn dom. It matters little that there are no fields to till 
amid ihe e barren rocks. The people of Pisoderi reap tlieir 
h irve ts 111 the Delia. They were very anxious to explain 
to me that this school of theirs is to be a modern and 
commercial school. The Greeks may build their classical 
gymnasia where boys may learn by heart a play or two, 
a speech of Demosthenes and hall the Odyssey. But the 
Vlachs are a practical people. If they too study Greek it is 
because there i:> no Eastern language so useful in the 
trade of the Levant. 

There is no race in all the Balkans so mysterious and 



Digitized by Google 



176 



MACEDONIA 



ao individual as the Vlaclit. They shelter then^ves in 
the Greek Churchi adopt Greek culture as a disguise, and 
serve the HeUenic idea. It is rare to meet a man among 
them who does not speak Greek more or less fluently and 
well, but at home the national Latin idiom persists, and their 
callings, their habits, their ways ol thinkiiig make them a 
nationality apart They are not a veiy numerous stock, 
though without their aid the Greeks would cut a poor 
figure among the statistics of the Macedonian races. The 
so-called Greeks" of Monastir are Vlachs to a man. 
They form a considerable and continuous group along 
the Pindus range, wedged between Thessaly and Eptnis. 
They are numerous once more between Olympus and 
KararVeria (the ancient Beroea). Elsewhere they have 
scattered villages, all built like Pisod^ among the rocks. 
Kruchevo, Nevedo, and IQisaoura are the most notable of 
these mountain^nests. They seem to be the scattered 
remnant of ancient Roman colonies, which took refuge on ' 
the spine of Macedonia from the tide of barbarian con* 
quest. It was a shy and fugitive existence which they 
led in these retreats. Agriculture was impossible, and 
they gave themselves to the tending of cattle* The Vlacfis 
of the non-mercantile villages are almost nomads— 
poor, wild and ignorant, with something like a gipsy 
reputation for dishonesty. They follow the migrations ol 
their flocks, spending the winter, it maybe, on the plains 
of Thessaly— so far afield do they roam— and returning in 
summer to their own mountain homes. They are not all 
organised in villages, as are the other peoples of Macedonia. 
Each of the Bulgarian villages round Castoria, for esounple, 
has its four or five houses of Vlachs. They live apart, 
rarely intermarrying with Slavs, upheld by some tradition 
of an ancient superiority which teaches them to despise the 
newer races. If they are a timid people they are also 
singularly tenacious. A family may be scattered between 
Roumania and Thessaly, but they never cease to be Vlachs ; 
and the women move about among their Bulgarian neigh- 
hours, never abandoning their neat costumes of navy-blue, 
more suggestive of Norway than of the Balkans. They 



Digitized by Goo 



THE VLACHS 



177 



are the inn^teepers and the carriere oi Macedomau If the 
nomad pastoral Vlach has a bad name^ the carrier (Kiradji) 
Vlach is a synonym for honesty* Their wandering habite, 
their international distribution, seemed to mark them out 
for ttiis trade. Little by littk^ as they developed it, their 
mountain*nests» .apt sites for sheep-cotes, became com- 
mercial centres, and It is no* small proof of their mercantile 
genius that KUssoura, for exanqile^ perched on the preci- 
pitous slope of a weary mountain, its streets mere ladders 
cut in the rock, the roads that approach it so many toilsome 
^irals, should have become a place of shops and baaars, 
with two market-days in the week. The railways, I fancy, 
have somewhat diminished the trade of the carrier Vlachs. 
The older men of Kruchevo and Kltssoura remember 
the days when a caravan went twice a year from their 
village to Vienna and t)roug)it back with it all that 
Macedonia needed from the West. But these were the 
days before Baron Hirsch had bribed Constantinople to 
allow him to build his railway. Now Kltssoura has some- 
thing of the air of a decayed town, which dreams amid 
its daily mists and infrequent suns of a glory that is 
departed* Half its houses are empty, and their architec- 
ture, solid, roomy, and with some incipient tendency to 
ornament speaks of a greater trade than any that survives. 
Its comfortable shopkeepers^ seated at ease on their heaps 
of cushions within the stout walls that defy the incessant 
rains of the mountain-top^ will tell you tiiat when they 
were boys Klissoura was the second city of Macedonia, 
hardly distanced by Salonica. In those great days there 
were even families which had pianos and German gover- 
nesses 1 Pisod^ had a more romantic history of a great 
past It is a modem village enough on its present site^ 
for it dates only from the second decade of bst centuiy, 
vtoi its ancestors, fleeing from the tyranny of All Pssha, 
found a refuge among &ese arid and inaccessible rocks 
which no cupidity would envy. Ask the average Vlach 
why his pec^e have perched theu* homes in these 
undesirable sites, and he will answer, with a frankness 
which is eloquent of Balkan conditions, ''Why, of course 

N 



Digitized by Google 



178 



MACEDONIA 



from fear.'* *^Apo Pkavon" is the monotonous rcfpoose 
to so many questions in Macedonia. "The coneys are 
a feeble folk^ but they have their dwellings among the 
rocks." The people of Pisod6ri came from Moschopolis, 
one of those semi-independent and rdatively civilised 
Christian communities of Albania which preserved a 
Hellenic culture among the Highlands until Alt Pasha 
crushed them. Moschopolis was ruined, but its inhabit 
tants escaped with their lives. Half of them settled at 
Pisod^; the other half fled as far north as Prizrend, 
where to this day they still preserve their identity and 
their traditions. Moschopolis was an eag^ centre of 
that stirring of ideas which preceded the Greek insurrection. 
It became a nest of culture when the learned Greeks of 
Constantinople found a refuge in it after the capture of 
their city by the Turks. It had in its great days a popu- 
lation of sixty thousand or more. It boasted a famous 
school, a public library, and a printing-press ; and among 
the treasures of the Vlach colony in Prizrend are still to 
be reckoned a little store of books which issued from it 
I have seen, too, at Koritza, a stained-gb»s window, coloured 
with no contemptible art, which came from Moschopolis. 
Relics like these, seen in a background of empty houses 
and decaying streets, lead one to suspect that, de^ite 
railways and reforms, Macedonia has actually retrognuM 
in civilisation during the past century. There are printing- 
offices in Salonica which issue semi-official newspapers in 
French for a Jewish public under T^kish censorship, and 
there is even a little hand-press in Monastir which can 
strike off visiting-cards in five or six languages. But in all 
Macedonia there is certainly at this moment no press 
which publishes books. Ta>day the Turk is stronger than 
he was in iSso, and the elaborate machinery of paralysis 
and strangulation which he calls a Government has oigan- 
ised itself with the aid of the telegraph into a penetrating 
and omnipresent system. 

The origin of the Vlachs is one of those problems of 
Balkan ethno^phy which seem desperate and obscure, 
chiefly because the scholars who have examined them are 



Digitized by 



THE VLACHS 



179 



partisans witli some nationalist thesis to uphold. No other 
Balkan race has quite so wide a distribution. They are 
Russian subjects in Bessarabia, Austro-Hungai lans in 
Transylvaiua and Ruthenia. They form an independent 
kingdom under the national name of Koumaina in the 
two Danubian provinces of Moldavia and Wallachia. 
They are a sensible fraction of the population of Servia 
and Bulgaria. In Macedonia they are the backbone of 
the Hellenic party. In Greece itself, and particularly in 
Thcssaly, they are numerous and iniluential. They are to 
be found also in Dalmatia and Bosnia, and under the name 
of Morlachs (Mavro-Vlachs, i.e., Nigri Latini) they served 
in the armies of the Venetian Republic. Their language, 
despite dialectical variations, due to the diversity of the 
alien influences to which it has been subjected, betrays a 
substantial identity. Their habits and customs arc also 
similar, and even the Austiiaii Roumans were, like their 
boutliern brethren, a pastoral people with the same shy 
preference for mountain dwellings. The Vlach language is 
as genuinely Latin as any of the Romance tongues of the 
West, and phonetically it has undergone in many way^ a 
less drastic modification. But it is a Latin tongue cut off 
from Latin culture. While the other Koukiucc languages 
have ceaselessly enriched themselves by a direct study of 
the parent ton^^iie, the Vlachs have led their isolated life, 
drawing their culture from the E.istern Church and Greek 
literature. In the Northern speech of the Roumanian 
kingdom, it is said, the Latin words are outnumbered by 
borrowed words of Slavonic origin ; but such a calculation 
conveys an erroneous impression, since the Latin words 
are those in most common use. The Vlach language as it 
is spoken in the Macedonian villages to-day is not much 
more than a patois for the home. Its vocabulary has lost 
all traces of culture. When a Vlach has occasion to use 
any word that involves more than the most elementary 
mental effort, he has recourse to Greek. If he wishes to 
express himself with any pictnrcsqueness or precision he 
must lard his conversation with Greek adjectives. The 
names of modern things and of all abstractions are also 



Digitized by Goo 



l«o MACEDONIA 

Greek, and tinlew he is an educated man he does not know 
the Latin alphabet 

The balance ot evidence goes to show that l>eCore the 
sixth century Macedonia had largely lost its earlier veneer 
of Hellenism. Amid the ceaseless inroads oi the barbarians 
such portion of the original Thradan and Macedonian 
population as survived must have been ttiat which grouped 
itself around the Latin-speaking military stations and 
colonies, and while augmenting their population adopted 
their idiom. During the annual raids of the barbarians, 
this Roman element must have t>een uprooted and sw^t 
hither and thither by the barbarian flood. Whole colonies 
of provincials were dragged about in the train of these 
tremendous mtg^ttions* There ia, for eaeample, one authentic 
instance in which a Roman colony from the cities of 
Southern Illyria was dragged by the Avars beyond the 
River Save. There it remained for seventy years, but 
revolted and returned across the Balkans to settle in the 
country inland from Salonica«> How far these Roman 
colonies were really Italian in blood is doubtful. We know, 
for example, that Ttajan's colonies in the Danubian pro- 
vinces, to which the Roumans of Roumania love to trace 
their origin, were drawn from every quarter of Ae Ronum 
world save Italy. Originally they must have been largely 
composed of Syrians and lUyrians, but the official language 
was apparently familiar enough to impose itself not only on 
these mixed colonies of veterans but even on their wives, 
their slaves and the refugees who would probably join thent. 
Their nomadic and pastoral habits were doubtless adopted 
more h'om necessity than choice. They could only main- 
tain themselves against the Barbarians and the Slavs on 
their mountain-tops, and there a settled agricultural life was 
manifestly impossible. During their struggle for existence 
their Latin civiUsaiion disappeared, mtuit the Latin tongue 
persisted as the language of the home. It is easier to 
understand the success of the Vlachs in maintaining their 
identity when one remembers that for three hundred years 

' See Dr. A. h Evans' artide, ''VlachSk" in the " EocydoiNBdia 

BhUnnica." 



Digitized by Goo 



THE VLACHS 



iBi 



during the Middle Ages they maintained some political 
independence in Great Wallachia, which extended at one 
lime not merely over Thcbsaly but also over the greater part 
of Southern Macedonia (see Chapter IV., p. 97 footnote). 
Their dealings ;it this period must have brought them into 
much moic intimate association with the Slavs than with 
the Greeks. The Greek influence which has partially 
Hellenised the Vlachs of Macedonia to-day can hardly 
date from before the Turkish conquest. It is the work not 
of the Byzantine Empire but of the modern Church, 
and seems to have reached its height during the eighteenth 
century. 

* • « * • 

The explanation of the failure of the Greeks to absorb 
the Vlachs of Macedonia, despite the influence of their 
Church, their commerce, and their schools, is to be sought, 
I suspect, in the position of the Oriental woman. She is 
the conservative force in the East, unchanging from genera- 
tion to generation, simply because she is still almost totally 
uneducated. The men of a Vlach household may acquire 
an easy and even literary knowledge of Greek, and prefer 
to use it in their intercourse with one another. But it is 
only in the present generation that the women have begun 
to go to school, and Vlach persists because it is the 
language which they first teach to their children. There 
is, of course, nothmg approaching the rigidity of the harem 
system among the Christian women of the East, but Turkish 
influence has had its part in delaying their emancipation. 
In some of the more savage towns of Northern Albania no 
Christian woman will venture into the streets without a 
veil as close and forbidding as any Moslem Yashmak. The 
Buli^arian peasant woman seems to feel herself inadequately 
clothed unless she has swathed her mouth and chin in the 
kerchief which she binds about her head. In the home 
her place is one of decent and tunid retirement. She will 
not sit down at table if a stranger be present. Her place 
during a "call " is to hand round the jam and the raki, but 
she rarely joins in the conversation. She is in no sense the 
companion of her husbandi she has no social place as the 



Digitized by Google 



i82 MACEDONIA 

hostess.* In the larger towns, where one mi^t ha^ 
expected the growth of something like a middle class with 
Europeon habits and conventionsi the presence of the 
Turkish population perpetuates the past The streets are 
thou^t to be no place for a respectable Christian woman. 
There is alwajrs a bare chance of violence and something 
approaching a probability of insult The native women 
accordingly keep indoors as much as possible, for the outer 
world is for their imagination a place in which Turkish 
soldiers lie in wait to hurl abuse at them. It is supposed 
that European costume, and above all European hats excite 
the Turk's peculiar sense of humour and even arouse his 
fanaticism. I have known young ladies of the present 
generation who keep marvellous hats and jackets, of what 
is supposed to be the European fashion, in locked trunks, 
whicii they exhibit on dull afternoons to callers. But out- 
side the shuttered house and the closed courtyard they dare 
to wear nothing but the traditional costumes of their race. 
Even in Monastir, where all the townsmen wear European 
clothes, and every tailor caUs himself a Francorafles, 
it is surprising how few of the wealthier native women 
venture to wear their Salonica finery. In the bazaars and 

' The porition of women in the East is a subject on which one Is apt 

to form hasty judgments. Certainly they nrc everywhere treated as 
tlie recognised inferiors of the men — which in nearly every respect, 
even in point of physical beauty, they undoubtedly are. This is more 
noticeable, however, in lands still under Turkish rule. During i^yj, 
when Athens was crowded with refugees from Crete aud ThessaTy, who 
were fed at public tables, I noticed that the men and women from 
Thesaaly sat oown together, whereas the Cretan men were served first, 
and the women only after their lords had dined. I have often felt 
indignant on meeting a peasant family on its travels, the man riding, 
the woman afoot. But really this is due to some queer tradition of 
female modesty for which the men arc not to blame. Two wounded 
girls from a village left our hospital in Ochrida, cured, but still 
delicate, and we provided pack-horses for them. Nothing, however, 
wonld induce them to ride, and in reply to our questions they would 
only say that it was " incorrect." The Bulgarian folk-songs of Mace- 
donia prove that a delicate and quite refined sentiment may be felt by 
the young men during courtship. Our own peasant-ballads are uot 
always so pretty. The Bulgarian songs also talk of the wife in a strain 
of famihar humour as the ruler of the house. The "subjection of the 
women, which strikes a stranger most unpleasantly, is largely a matter 
of mamwn and forms. 



Digitized by Google 



THE VJLACHS 183 

even in the quasi-European shops of the main streets one 
meets few Christian women, exceptmg always the peasant 
women of the villages. Shopping is done by the men or 
by the servants of the family, and social intercourse hardly 
goes beyond the gossiping of neighbours. Even for 
European ladies it is thought scarcely respectable and 
scarcely safe to venture out of doors without the escort 
of an armed Albanian cavass — but this is no doubt due, 
in part, to a desire to maintain their prestige, and the men 
are also rarely to be seen alone. These customs and con- 
ventions, which may seem trivial enoui^h, have in reality 
a profound nifluerice on Christian society and even on 
Macedonian politics, \\'omcn who iead this secluded life, 
cut otf from mtercourse with luiy larger circle tli.in their 
family :ind neighbours of their own sex, inevitably live in 
the past and conserve the past. Modern connnercc, tnodern 
schools, railways, and those national movements which link 
the men of a Macedonian town to the free life of one or 
other of the emancipated states beyond the Turkish frontier, 
have little influence on the stagnant and secluded existence 
of the home. Here, for example, is one reason why, during 
the centuries when educated Vlachs, Albanians, and even 
Bulgarians imbibed Greek culture, spoke and wrote the 
Greek language and thought of themselves as Greeks, the 
women retained their own idiom and their own traditions. 
Had the Greeks spent the same pains on educating the 
women of Macedonia that they took to Hellenise the men^ 
the whole Balkan Peninsula might have been Greek to-day. 
Generation by generation the children of these artificial 
Greeks learned at their mother's knee a native and non« 
Hellenic tongue. They might despise it as a patois, they 
might be ignorant of the very alphabet in which it should 
be written. But despite themselves it was in this paiois 
that they were forced to express their most intimate 
thoughts, their most human emotions. It only needed an 
impulse from without^ and the revolt of nationalism which 
the women had unconsciously prepared found an echo in 
the very fibre of their minds. Tardily the Greeks are 
realising their mistake. There are now secondary schools 



Digitized by Google 



184 



MACEDONIA 



for girls which are doing their best to Hellenise the Vlachs 
of Monastir and the Albanians of Ivontza. But the social 
conditions of this Turk-haunted land arc agauisl the enter- 
prise. The girls marry early and leave school early. They 
cannot abaiidon the patois of then aiuthers. Greek is lor 
them the language of a distant and masculine outer world 
beyond the closely guarded home, and while that world is 
closed to them its language is a superfluity, a mere elegant 
accomplishment. 1 have seen the excellent Greek school 
for girls at Monastir where Vlach maidens are painfully 
taught to construe their Xenophon. The ludicrous mis- 
takes of grammar which one he u cl in the lower forms 
were enough to show that the teachers were drilling these 
children in a foreign tongue. It is easy to taboo every 
word of Vlach within the schoolroom walls. But outside 
on the steps when Urania quarrels with Aspasia over her 
broken doll, she expresses her feelings in fluent and 
natural Vlach. And what is true of the Vlachs is equally 
true of the Albanians, I knew a wealthy commercial 
family in Koritza which showed the several strata of 
Helienisation very clearly. The mother was a dignified 
old lady who dressed in native costume and knew no word 
of any language but Albanian. The sons, merchants and 
bankers, spoke excellent Greek, which had, however, a 
stilted and classical tinge that they would never have 
acquired in the nursery. The daui^hters of the house wore 
"skirts and blouses." They had passed through the Greek 
High School ; but that was some vears ago. To-day they 
know about as much of Greek as the average middle-class 
girl at home knows of French, and are quite as shy of 
venturing to express themselves in it. 

Twenty years ai^o there was nothing in Balkan politics 
so inevitable, so nearly axiomatic, as the connection of 
the \ laclis with the Greek cause. They had no national 
consciousness and no national ambitions. Scattered as 
they are, it was obviously impossible for them to dream 
of a Vlach nation. They were unmoved by the secession 
of the Bulgars — indeed, it only confirmed them in their 
rooted belief that the bulgars belong to an inferior order 



Digitized by Go 



THE VLACHS 



of creation. With some of them Hellenism was a passion 
and an enthusiasm. They believed tlicm selves to be Greek. 
They baptized their children " The mist (kIcs " and Pene- 
lope." They studied in Athens, and they left their fortunes 
to found Greek schools unci Greek hospitals. With the 
mass of the Vlaclis, however, this loyalty to Greece was a 
more calculating and interested attachment. This sparse 
and furtive race is of neces-^ity o{:>portunist. it seeks to 
merge and conceal itself in some larger organisation from 
the same timid and unobtrusive instinct which causes it 
to build its vilhj^es on the mountains. So long as Greece 
held an undisputed prauacy among the Christian peoples 
of the Balkan Peninsula it was obviously the interest of 
the Vlachs to shelter under the Greek name. She was 
the eldest of the independent states, she claimed the 
reversion of Constantinople itself, and, what is perhaps 
more important, she controlled the Church, And so the 
Vlachs attached themselves to the Greeks as the Jews 
attacli themselves to the Turks. But the recent mis- 
fortunes of Greece have thrown some doubt on the wisdom 
of this connection. The war of 1897 not only exposed 
the Greeks of Turkev to the hostility oi tiie Government, 
but it demonstrated the hopeless weakness of the Greek 
army. The Bulgarian Committee, on the Dthcr hand, is 
a real and very present force, which no prudent race of 
timid priiiciples can affect to despise. Moienxer, liehuid 
the Commiilee the Vlachs can discern the ethcient Bul- 
t^arian army and the overw liehning power of Russia. Thev 
leel that the Greek idea oi a revi val t )f the Eastern 1-^mpire 
on a Hellenic basis is a very remote cliiniera indeed, and 
being practical politicians they are liec^inning to recon- 
sider their place in the new scheme of things. The 
stroni^^er force has an attraction for the Vlach mind, which 
soraeluues hnds a naive and frank expression. "Greece 
has no army," as a Vlach storekeeper in Klissoura said to 
me, "and Konmania is very far awav. Bulgaria is both 
near and powerkil. ' Unwilling, on these sound if some- 
what unromantic grounds, to excite the animosity of the 
Bulgarians^ who are after all their best customers as well 



I 



L 



Digitized by Google 



186 



MACEDONIA 



as the masters of a dangerous secret organisation which 
shows little mercy to ils enemies^ tiie Vhichs have found 
the present Hellenic policy a very sore strain on their ' 
loyalty. It is very well for the Greek Patriarch in 
Constantinople and Greek Ministers in Athens to conclude 
an alliance with the Turks against the Bulgarian wolves," 
and to exhort all the faithful to denounce and betray their 
Bul^ian nei|^l>ours to the Turkish authorities. But 
isolated Vlach villages like Pisod^ and Klissoura have 
after all to live among these " wolves," and they find their 
friendship more profitable than their vengeance. And 
without attributing to the Vlachs any high or chivalrous 
motives, which scarcely form a part of their character, 
they are certainly "good neighbours/' whose native kindliness 
has not been undermined by a ''cultured" devotion to 
political abstractions. When the Bulgarian villages round ! 
Klissoura had been burned by the Turks with the blessing 
of the Greek Archbishop of Castoria, and the assistance 
of a Greek band, the Vlachs gave the homeless refugees 
a welcome and a shelter, and housed nearly two thousand 
of them for the winter. In significant contrast wa^> the 
attitude of the genuine Greek town of Castoria, which | 
received barely a score of Bulgarian fugitives. Another 
Vlach village, which I will call X, was on even more inti- 
mate terms with the rebels. It had no scruple about 
supplying Tchakalaroff's band with provisions. It had 
quietly armed itself, moreover, for all eventualities, and 
assured iiic that it had its five hundred rides in d sliIc but 
convenient place. At the outset of the insurrection ii even 
h id suine thoughts of joining the Bulgarians. But with 
true Vlach caution it waited to see how matters would .^o. 
If the rising had promised success, then, for all it^ Greek 
school, its Greek priests and its Phil-hellenic Ir iditions, 
it wuukl have joined the stronger side. But not ;di tlic 
Vlachs temporised. Sixty young men froui a ,^ioup ui 
Vlach villages near Monastir actually joined the huul:,. 
Others from P'lorina and Monastir swelled tlicir ranks, 
And while the Greek officers in Athens were ohering their | 
^wuids lu the Sultan, these lads were marching agam:it 

I 

I 

I 

I 



Digitized by Google 



THE VLACHS 



187 



the Turks to the rhythm of a Greek war-song. But despite 
this Vlach legion, and the fact that the Vlach, Pitou Goul6, 
who led the Kruchevo bands, and one of TcfaakarjUoff's 
most trusted lieutenants, Mitri Vlacho, did their best to 
rouse their kinsmen, it would be a mistake to sappose 
that any great number of them joined the Bnlgarians 
openly. That will happen only when the Bulgarians are 
on the eve of victory. 

From another quarter the Greek connection is seriously 
threatened. Thirty years ago a clever Hellenised Vlach of 
Monastir, Apostolo Margariti, once a teacher in a Greek 
school, invented the Roumanian propaganda in Macedonia, 
Servia and Bulgaria and Greece each had their foothold 
in Macedonia. By standing aloof Roumania virtually re- 
nounced her position :i li.ilkan State. Doubtless the 
Vlachs are nowhere in .1 in iju: ity, and Roumania can never 
hope for the reversion of any portion of Macedonian terri- 
tory. But in these poor relations, a kindred people speak- 
ing the same toii^in , >he obviously ha^ lln means of making 
her influence le!t. Could she but detaeli tlie Vlachs from 
their alle,i^Kince lu Greece, she would have id once her 
pieces in die ,L^ame. Should she wish to acquire Uie tnend- 
ship of Bulgaria, she could throw the X'lachs into the 
balance on the Bulgari m bide, and deuKind her price for 
the favour in any re-arrj.n^ement of territory — the Bulgarian 
district of Silistria, for example. Sliuuld die be on bad 
Icnns with her Bulgarian nci4hl)ovu, she can coquet with 
Greece, talk of the couimuu interest of the Greek and 
*■ Latin " races of the Balkans in opposing the coiuuioa 
barbarian enemy, and lorlhwith direct the Vlachs to assist 
their uld allies once more. Indeed, the situation seemed to 
lend itself to endless combinations, any one of them fruittul 
tit advantage.* The Vlachs are, in a sense, the pivot of the 
.Maeecli)nian (juestion. They are not nimierous in compari- 
son widi the Bulgarians, or even with the Alhanian-.. Hut 
widioui them the Greeks would cut a sorry ligure. North 
ot Castoria there is not so much as a single Greek village. 

■ A Vlach -Albanian alliance ts also a nmch-discossed possibility (see 
Cliapter Vlli., pp. 286-87, no^). 



Digitized by Google 



MACEDONIA 



It is only the Vlachs who give Hellenism a foothold. 
Withdraw them from their Greek alliance, and Greece must 
disappear from Macedonia. Group them with the Bul- 
garianSy and the Slav supremacy will be unquestioned and 
unchallenged. This reasoning appealed to Houmania, and 
Margariti obtained the funds he demanded. Roumanian 
schools were opened in all the more important Vlach 
centres. Villages were bribed to dcclarL themselves Rou- 
manian, and priests here and there began to say Mass in 
Roumanian. The Turks were delighted. It meant one 
rift the more among the Christians. The Cji Lckb, n.ituially 
fought the new movement with their familiar WL.ipons. No 
calumny was too gross for poor Marganli him i ll, :ind pro- 
bably he was no better Ih.iu the average Levarii me adven- 
turer. The Patriarch showed liimself. as usual, niorc Greek 
than Christian. The idea ui nuaKii itinc; ;i \'iacli idishop was 
scouted, and the few priests who dared to say Mass in 
Roumanian were promptly excommunicated. For a gene- 
ration tlie movement made litilc progress. The schools had 
more teachers than pupils, and every pupil had to be paid 
to learn, Xonc of the larger and wealthier Vlach viliaijes 
abandoned Ilcllcriisin, lad for a time it seemed tiiat the 
Greeks could ahord to laugh. 

But within the past two or three year^ a cliangc has 
become apparent, i he stram of the Greek coimection will 
bear no more, for Greece is too clearly a weak protector. 
Roumania has redoubled her etTorts. She now votes 
600,000 francs annnaUy ior the propaganda — a sum which 
will buy 111 any adherents. She has opened a Consulate as far 
soudi as Janniiia. Thi' consul at Monastir has won the ear 
of Hilmi Pasha, who sees the policy of weakening the 
Greeks. Through the consul's influence any Vlach of 
moderate parts can be sure of obtaining a Government 
appointment, and there could be no more puwcrful bribe 
than that. Village after village has accepted a Roumanian 
school, and only the wealthier centres hold out 

In May, 1905, the Vlach question came to a crisis. The 
Vali of Jannina, who was under Greek influence, did 
violence to the sanctity ot the Roumanian Consulate and 



Digitized by GoogI 



THE VLACHS 189 

to the posons of some Romnanian school inspectors. A 
violent diplfMnatic conflict followed^ which ended in a 
complete victory for Roumania. Bat indeed it suited 
Toitish policy to yield. The Vlachs are now formally 
organised as a separate nationality (MUUtit with the right 
to possess officially recognised schools and churches of its 
own. From the Turkish standpoint this can only tend 
to weaken the Christians. The Greek Patriarchate pro- 
tested, as it always has done wherever a Balkan race has 
won the right to worship in its own tongue. The only 
result was to drive the Vlachs towards the Ezarchist fold. 
They know that the Bulgarians will respect their language 
and^eir racial identity^the Bulgarians are not Impe- 
rialists. The murderous violence of the Greek bands has 
done the rest, and the Vlachs, too weak to stand alonc^ are 
now the allies of the Bulgarians. 

For some years to come, Greece and Roumania are likely 
to continue their battle for the possession of the Vlach 
villages.' The conflict rages mainly around the Church — 
like all conflicts in the BaUau»-«nd both sides show a 
^oulish tendency to make the graveyard their chosen 
battle-ground. No Vlach can die in Ifonastir without a 
free fi^t b et we en pro-Greeks and pro-Roumanians as to 
whidi language shall be used to dedicate his soul to God. 
Greeks and Catholics never fought with more ardour for 
the keys of the Holy Sepulchre than do Greeks and 
Roumanians for the corpse of a dead Vlach. An extract 
from an official Greek publication * gives a lively idea of 
one of these encounters 



"A Vlach belonging to the Greek-Orthodox Church having died 
at Monastir, his brother, who had been won over to the Roumanian 

Sropaganda by methods familiar to us ail, aciualiy dared to form 
le project of having him buried by a Roumania pi iest not 
recognised by the Patriarch, and to nloae the(Groek) Bishop of 
Pel^ooia entry into the mortuary. 

"liiefle proolBedingB •roused mo UveUeil irrHstion among the 
Greek-Ortluul IX j ojniUtion of Monastir and among the friends o( 
the dead man. There was clearly an intention to create a preco- 



■ For the later developments of this feud, see Chapter. VII., p. 218, 
note. 

• MmiUaH d^Ofwttt AftbenSk Joly 1, 1904. 



Digitized by Google 



190 MACEDONIA 

dent which would soon permit the Roumanian propaganda to have 
its own priests, and to build a churcli at Monastir, m defiance of 
the canons of the Orthodox Church and of the clearly expressed 
will of the Vlach population. Moreover, the suspicious of the 

eoblic were confirmed bj the fact that the said propaganda is 
nilding a house which has a strange resemM-inr< to a chapel. 
"The Greek Bishop having fulfilled his duty, which was to for- 
bid the celebration of the funeral rites by an unrecognised priest, 
the Turkish authorities had the body embalmed, and announced 
that the burial must be pos^ned until the anivai of instnictioos 
from Constantinople. 

** Bot hi spite of this declaration they decided shortly afterwards 
to have the dead man buried by the Roumanian :iriL>t. At this 
news the exasperated populace went to the mortuary, unharnessed 
the hearse, assaulted Pinettu, the notorious son-in-law of Apostolo 
Margariti, with several other prominent pro>Roumanians, and 
refused to obey the armed force which summoned it to disperse. 
The whole town was in disturtiance, and the market was closed for 
three hours. 

"The Va!i, greatly impressed by the decided attitude of the 
Greeks, whom two charges of cavalry had tailed to disperse (?), 
telegraphed directly to the Sultan to lay bcfoi e him the gravity of 
the situation, and to asic for instructions. In reply he received the 
order to surrender the corpse neither to the (ireeks nor the pro- 
Roumanians, and to entrust the lo<^ authorities with the buhaL" 

This glorioub victnrv lor Greece is a sis^n iticanl com- 
mentary both on tlic habits of the Greek nuiid aiul ilic 
methods of the Turkish Government. These Thermopyhies 
of the mortuary are the triumphs to uliich modern 
Helienibin aspires. Every detail is a satire ui it-?Lll— the 
inability of the local authorities to bury a corpse will) out 
consulting Constantinople ; that delicious touch of the 
embuhning of the poor body while CoiiNi.intinople t nclily 
replies ; the hnal appeal to the Sultan hnn5tjlf,and tlu rough 
justice ol the decision that smce the Christians were 
quarrelling, the body must have a secular buriai. Nothing 
could be mure Turkish^ and nothing could be mure Greek. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VII 



THE GSBBK8 



HERE is an obscure little place in Macedonia which 



deserves the title of ''the home of lost causes." 
Castoria is a town cloistered among the hills and mirrored 
in a lake of calm. It stands amidst the waters on its nar- 
row neck of land, and the mined gateways that block the 
road to the mainland and the modem world serve only 
as an exit for the restless and the yomig. To the west a 
discreet curtain of low hills rises abmptly from the further 
shore^ veiling the plain where the Albanian is master. To 
the north and the east there are mountains on whose slopes 
hang the white villages of Slav peasants^ but at a distance 
one may confound them with the snows. 

Castoria itself is Greek, an islet fixed amid the unquiet 
waves of Albanian raid and Bulgarian rebellion. It is 
disdainfully, completely Greek, and it treats as vain 
travellers' tales the ramours that tell of other races and 
barbarian peoples. The Bulgarians of the next hamlet are 
remote as anthropophagi ; the Albanians just beyond the 
hill are the unknown tribes of the Cimmerian darkness. 
On this rock the Byzantine Empire has never ended. It 
was a place of exile under the Eastern Caesars^ and the 
modem people ol Castoria are the lineal descendants of 
patriots who contended against the Filioque clause. To 
this day it boasts its hundred and fifty churches— votive 
diapels for the most par^ erected by banished noblemen 
in tfie hope that Pirovidence might tiiink better of it and 
restore them to favour at court. There are, to he sure, 




Digitized by Google 



1^2 



MACEDONIA 



some Turks m Castoria; bnt they are nomads and aliens 
who came but yesterday and may go to-morrow. 

There is a Turkish Kainiakaui in Castoria, and a big 
konak, which serves as prefecture. But the Governor is 
a harmless httle man, some clerk from Constantinople, a 
foreigner who speaks no language of the country. The 
prefecture is a crumbHng shell with walls of lath and 
plaster and a great gaping hole over the principal doorway. 
The real Governor is the Greek Archbishop. You may see 
him any day towards noon — a handsome figure with black 
robe, black beard, flowing locks, and chiselled features, 
prancing up the main street on his white horse from the 
prefecture to his own palace on the hill. He has been 
dictating policy to the Turkish Kaitnakam. A week before 
our first meeting a Bulgarian Bishop had ventured to slink 
into the town. Within an hour of his arrival the church 
bells were ringing; the Greek Archbishop on his white 
charger, was massing the faithful for the act of protest, 
and soon a surging crowd was shouting death to the 
invader, under the house where he had sheltered. A few- 
hours later a Turkish escort conducted the rash intruder 
out beyond the gates of the sacred city, and abandoned 
him in the wilderness, inhabited, so rumour has it, by the 
wolves and the bears and the Bulgarians. 

There are many ways of dealing with Turks. There is 
the old-fashioned English method of bullying. There is 
the brutal, inartistic, Bulgarian way, much practised by 
the Committee — plain, downright blackmail. The Greek 
method is subtler. A Greek, when he corrupts you, does 
it with grace. He makes you feel that you are doing him 
a favour when you accept his very inadequate gift. He 
flatters your magnanimity. He tickles the dull Turkish 
wit with tales and anecdotes and a flow of easy talk. The 
first qualification of a Greek Bishop is to talk Turkish with 
elegance, and the second is to use the Church funds with 
discretion. It is often said that the Turk has corrupted 
the East, But then it was the Greeks who comipted the 
Turk. 

The Archbishop's was a character that repcUed, yet 



Digitized by Google 



I 

I 



THE GREEKS 193 

fascinated. One was never at an end of the snrpriaes 
whtdi it offered. I remember well otir 6r8t meeting. We 
bcigan our conversation in Greek, but in a few minotes we 
had discovered that we had been at a German university 
together, and the man I had taken for a Byzantine assumed 
the guise of a Berliner. Education is rare among the 
Greek Bishops, and I had never yet met a man among them 
who ^ke a Western tongue. His Beatitude seemed, a 
modern of the modems. Could this be the fonatic who 
persecuted Bulgarian peasants to force them into his 
Church f Gould this be the raging partisan who massed 
his people to drive the schismatic Bulgarian Bishop from 
the town? In five minutes he had professed himself a 
philosopher. In ten minutes he had avowed himself a 
freediinker. And he had views on psychology. He had 
read his Lotze, and soon we were criticising the ethics of 
Wundt. But there, above my head, on the wall, in a 
conspicuous place, hung the photograph of a ghastly head, 
severed at the neck, with a bullet through the jaw, dripping 
blood. And then I remembered the tale. That head had 
belong^ to a Bulgarian chief. A band of bravoes in flie 
Archbishop's pay had murdered him as he lay wounded in 
hiding. And the tale went on to tell how tiie murderers 
carried the bleeding trophy to the Palace^ and how the 
Ardibishop had had it photographed and paid its price in 
fifty pieces of gold. And ther^ over my head, hung 
the photograph. Somehow we stopped talking moral 
philosophy. 

We met once again, this time in the konak of the Turkish 
Kaimakam, and once more a photograph caught my eye. 
It showed the Turkish authorities standing in fuU-'dress 
round a Turkish cannon, and in their midst, handsome, 
conspicuous, with an air of mastery and command, was the 
Archbishop himself. And then I remembered another tale, 
which told how his Grace had sent his bravoes to guide the 
Turkish troops in their work of massacre, and blessed the 
cannon that were to batter the Bulgarian villages to dust 
And then, under the very ears of the Kaimakam and the 
local commandant, his Beatitude bqgan to talk treason — in 
o 



Digitized by Google 



194 MACEDONIA 

Gennan, He assured me that his alliance with the Turks 
was only temporary. A great day was comings when 
Hellenism would daim her own. It was only necessary 
to crush the Bulgarians first A smile played over the 
handsome face as he assured me that he had brought up 
Cretans, trained mountaineers^ redoubtable fighters^ to spy 
out the land and study the passes, against the day when he 
would unfurl the flag of revolt. Nor had he forgotten to 
collect his store of rifles. 

Happily for the Greeks their Church reckons only one 
Borgia among its Bishops* The man has a quick wi^ a 
restless will, a nervous, well-knit body which have all gone 
to the making of an ezcqrtional temperament. But about 
his attitude there was nothing at all unusual. The 
Greeks of Macedonia are before all else legitimists. The 
Bulg^uian will assert that in point of fact the Macedonians 
are Slavs. The Greek takes higher ground. His mind 
moves among abstractions. He talks not of Greeks, but of 
Hellenism, not of fact, but of right. That Hellenism has a 
right to Macedonia is his thesis, and he is never at a loss 
for an argument He begins of course with Alexander. It 
does not trouble him that in classical times the Greeks 
possessed only a few isolated colonies on the Macedonian 
coast He waves aside the objection that for the ancients, 
Alexander and his Macedonians were no l)etter than bar* 
barians. Aristotle won the country for Hellentsm when he 
gave lessons to Philip's son, and sill Macedonia is in con- 
sequence a sort of legacy bequeathed by the Stoa to King 
George. Object that even the Macedonians vanished, and 
the Greek changes his ground. Hellenism, which had 
meant Athenian culture, now stands for the Byzantine 
Empire. But in the interval between Aristotle and Con- 
stantine Macedonia was more or less Romanised. In the 
dark ages it was ruled by Servian krals, by Bulgarian tsars, 
and even by Prankish king$, but still its legitimate overlord 
was Byzantium, and Byzantium had become Greek. One 
may answer that the Byzantine Empire has after all gone 
under, and that it had lost Macedonia to the SUvs long 
before it was driven from Constantinople. But once 



Digitized by Google 



THE GREEKS 



again the old elastic abstraction re-appears. " Hellenism " 
claims thesu peoples because they were civilised by the 
"Greek Orthodox" Church. That is a conception which 
the Western mind grasps with di£Bculty. It is much as 
though the "Roman" Catholic Church should claim the 
greater part of Europe as the mhentance of Italy. To 
make the parallel complete we should have to imagine 
not only an Italian Pope and a College of Cardinals in 
which Italians predominate, hut a completely Italian 
hierarchy. If every Bishup in France and Germany were 
an Italian, if the official language of the Church were not 
Latin hut Italian, and if every priest were a political agent 
working tor the annexation of France and Germany to Italy, 
we should have some analogy to the state of things which 
actually exists in Turkey. So it has been ever since the 
Turks took Constantinople, and so it is still. While the 
first Sultans destroyed the Byzantine Empire they gladly 
tolerated the Orthodox Church. The Patriarchate was sold 
at frequent mtervals and at a steadily risin^^ price to any 
Greek adventurer who could buy his nomination. He 
recouped himself by selling the consecration of Bishops, 
and they m turn, regarding this outlay as a legitimate invest- 
ment of capital, proceeded to farm their dioceses. Out of 
this system there grew up a new Greek aristocracy in Con- 
stantinople, grouped round the Phanar — as the Patriarch's 
seat was called. The lay members enjoyed the confidence 
of the Porte, and bought offices of much prolU and power. 
Phanariots were always chosen to govern Moldavia and 
Wallachia, and they usually filled the positions of Drago- 
man of the l^orte and Dragoman of tlie Meet. The clerical 
members exploited the Church, and between them they set 
themselves to crush the Slavs and the Roumanians with the 
authority of the Turks behmd them. They extinguished 
the Servian Patriarchate of Ipek, and the Bulgarian 
Patriarchate of Ochrida. The hierarchy by the middle of 
the seventeenth century was a close preserve for Greeks, 
and their power was unchecked until in the early decades 
of the nineteenth century the Greek Wars of independence 
caused the Turks to suspect the loyalty oi their Phaoariot 



Digrtized by Google 



196 



MACEDONIA 



chril aervioe. The Sbvonlc Onirches liad disappeared from 
Macedonia, and everyndiere the Greek Bishops, as intolerant 
as they were comipl— Blind mouths that scarce themselves 
knew how to hold A sheephook "—crushed oat the national 
consciousness^ the language^ and the intellectual life of their 
Slav flocks. It is as a result of this process that the Eastern 
Church is a Greek Churdi. The sanctions of Hellenism^" 
so far as they rest on the Church, are the wealth of the 
Phanariots and the venality of the T^ks. But it is after 
all a barren title. The Greeks had their chance. For three 
centuries they monopolised the culture of the Near East 
The very names of Slav and Bulgarian persisted only as 
terms of abuse. Slav letters were forgotten, and even the 
Slav libraries in the old monasteries were bivned by the 
Greek Bishops. But while they alone had learning, riches, 
or influence, they never rose to the hei^t of their 
position. Had they played their part as dder brothers 
in civilisation towards their Slav parishioners, under the 
common oppression, the Balkans would have been Greek 
to-day. Their thoughts were all of the rigfits they 
had bought, and the profits they might make. They ac- 
knowledged no duties, and Macedonia in consequence was 
never Hellenised. But to-day, when tiie Bulgarian revolt 
is an accomplished fact, and even Vladis and Albanians 
are growing restless under the old intolerant dominion, the 
Greeks can see in the situation only a rebellion against 
their own immemorial privil^es ; the sense that their own 
profits, their own prerogatives are at stake, blinds them 
to the most obvious facts, and hardens the racial conflict 
into something worse than a national feud. It is the revolt 
of a peasantry against a privileged aristocracy, as well as 
the clash of two competing races. To the Greek Bishops 
all Macedonians are Greeks because they are by right the 
tritmtaries of the Patriarch. Tnie^ they are at present in 
schism, but a schism is an offence against the rational order 
of the Universe. A Greek can never bring himself to 
regard the Bulgarians as a race witii the same right and 
title as his own. They are simply excommunicated 
sdkismatics whose contumacy must be reduced by any 



Digitized by Google 



THE GREEKS 



197 



means available. The patent fact tiiat they are not Gredn 
and do not even know the Greek language in no way 
diaturbe him. Hie Bishop of Fiorina, when he wishes to 
address a sermon or exhortation to his flock in the 
Cathedral, is obliged to preach in Turkish. They are all 
Bulgarians : few of them know Greek, but most have been 
compelled to pick up a certain knowledge of Turkish. And 
yet Fiorina figures in the Greek imagination and in Greek 
statistics as a Greek town. It belong to "Hellenism"— 
a Hellenism that expresses itself in the dialect of an 
Asiatic tyranny. 

There is yei another development of the Greek theory 
which deserves a, rather more respectful handling. It is 
politically sound, but the range of its applieation is not large. 
1 have never heard it in the East : it is due rather to a few 
cultured Greeks dumiciled in Paris, who ha\ e come under 
the influence of Radical Philhellenes of the type of M. 
Clciiienceau. It is an adaptation of Maz^im's idealistic 
nationalism. Race on this view is a mere invention of 
pseudo-science, and language is an accident. A man may 
talk what dialect he pleases and still possess "a Greek 
heart." The anthropulogists may invent what claasitication 
they choose for lu-, skull ; if "Hellenism" is the vital force of 
his life, of wliiit unportance is his facial angle ? The folk of 
Alsace may be Germans by race and talk a German 
patois in their homes, but on any Liberal view o\ nationality 
they are French. Nationality, in short, is a spiritual and not 
an etiinological fact ; it rests on common ideals, a common 
history, common strivings m the past and common 
ambitions for the future ; its test is neither race nor 
language, but consent. P'or my part I agree warmly, but I 
fail to see the application. In the hrst place I have my 
doid^ts whether the "Hellenism" of a Macedonian Slav 
peasant wlio cannot apeak a word of Greek has any meaning 
at all. What is its ideal content, where are the common 
traditions and aspirations which Mazzuu's theory requires ? 
With the educated Vlachs of Monastir the case is different ; 
intellectually they are Greeks, whatever language they may 
talk at home ; but untortuoately theu^ numbers are relatively 



Digitized by Google 



198 



MACEDONIA 



inconsiderable. One might admit perhaps that a Viach, and 
even a Slav village, however slight its culture and however 
scanty its knowledi^e of Greek, is for poluicai purposes to 
be reckoned as Greek, provided that its adhesion to the 
Greek national propaganda (which means m practice the 
Patriarchist Church) is permanent and voluntary. But of 
liow many villages north of Ca^toria and \^idena could this 
be asserted ? The Vlach villages are passing through a 
transition stage, and it they were freed from the spiritual 
tt rrorism of the Greek Church, which holds thcin by a 
threat of excommunication, and the physical terrorism of 
the Greek bands which assassinate their notables and 
teachers, it is possible, though by no means certain, that 
the majority of them would declare then^selves Roumanians. 
Over most of the Slav villages which are still Patriarchist I 
imagine that the hold of the Greek propaganda is even more 
slender. They shift tiieir allegiance year by year according 
as they think they have more to fear from the hostility of 
the Greek I3i>hupsor the Bulgarian Committee. So far as 
there is a real Greek party among them it consists mainly of 
the wealthier peasants — priests, moneylenders, storekeepers, 
and innkeepers — and even these men are "Greek" largely 
because the existing entente between Turks and Greeks 
procures them the favour of the authorities. With a Greek 
band and an energetic Bisliop to back them, they may 
succeed at present in retaining the mass of the pe:isants in 
certain villages within the Greek fold. But my impression 
is that the more democratic Bulgarian movement really 
has the sympathy of large numbers of these peasants who 
are "Greek" from fear or from calculation. Under an 
impartial European control which reformed the Turkish 
administration and suppressed the hands, I fancy that a 
plebiscite would show that even in the districts of Vodena, 
Morichovo, and Serrcs, where Greek influence is still 
strong among the Slavs, the vast majority of the peasants 
would prefer to enrol themselves as Bulgarians rather than 
as Greeks. The Liberal Mazzinist theory of nationality can 
be applied to the Balkans only after liberal conditions have 
been created. 



Digitized by Go 



THE GREEKS 



199 



The ecclesiastical pretensions of the Greeks are ludicrous 
enough, but they are not to be dismissed with a laugh* 
They have introduced a savagery into the relations of official 
^ Hellenism'* and the Bulgarian peasantry, which makes for 
something more than comedy. Early in the winter which 
followed the Macedonian rising it became obvious that 
epidemics might prove more fatad to the houseless villagers 
than either hunger or the Turks, and there were, moreoveri 
wounded women and children to be cared for. It seemed 
desirable to provide some sort of hospital for their use at 
Monastir. There are, it is true, two Turkish hospitals, one 
civil and one military, but the average peasant would ratho* 
die than trust himself within them. There is also a 
Greek hospital which is spacious and well-managed. 
Hearing that its two upper storeys were vacant, it occurred 
to me that if the British Relief Fund paid the expenses, 
the Greeks might consent to set apart these unoccupied 
rooms for the benefit of the Bulgarians. I went accordingly 
to the Bishop of Kruchevo, who was then acting for the 
Metropolitan of Monastir, to propound this scheme. A 
priest was standing in the doorway, and in my innoLLnce I 
asked hull in Greek if the Bishop was within. He looked 
blankly at mc, and then answered in Bulgarian, " Nesnam 
Girkski " ('M don't know Greek"). I suppose he would 
be ofiKuilly known in the language of controversy as a 
*' hhjlgarophone Greek." Upstairs the Bishop was seated 
on .1 -pL'cies of tlirone, surrounded by laymen, in what was 
tviclently a kiiid of council-room. He was :in elderly man, 
ample ;uid stately, with a solid, comfortable, unintelligent 
dignity, which sugi^ested a rather holy seal. 1 made my 
proposition, which seemed to take the pour maii'ii breath 
away, .u\d then followed this dialogue :— 

III c Bish op. The thing is utterly impossible. Our liospitai 
is uuly tor Greeks. 

Myself. That surprises me, your holiness. I am told 
that the Enghnh Concur i duuiss is at present a patient. 
Now he is an Albanian Moslem. 

The Bishop. Perhaps, l^erhaps, I don't kr^cnv. We might 
accept Euiupcaii:> or Calliuiic^ 01 even Turks as paying 



Digitized by Google 



200 



MACEDONIA 



patientSy but never z Bulgarian — certainly never a Bul- 
garian. 

Myself. May I ask why ? 

The BisJiop. They are our enemies. 

The answer was so frank, so primitive, that I found myself 
asking; him whether his hospital was a Christian or a pac^an 
institution, when a t^entleman who was sitting in the c rcle 
turned the uncointortable subject by enunciating the 
startling proposition that there are no liiili^.u i:ias. There 
arc only " Bulgarophone Greeks." I inquired iiow it hap- 
pened that they came to speak Bulgarian. And then, more 
or less in chorus, the Bishop and the laymen proceeded to 
develop a theory which is to be found even in the works of 
some Greek apolot^ists, who profess to write as scholars and 
historians. Originally, so runs this theory, the population 
of Macedonia was Hellenic, but it won so many victories 
over the Slavs, and took so many prisoners of war, that 
linguistic ditttculties arose. The Slavs being then, as now, 
notoriously stupid, would not learn Greek, so the Greeks 
were forced to learn Slav m order to have a means of giving 
orders to their servants. Little by little they forgot their 
own language, and the " Bulgarophone Greek" of modern 
Macedonia is the result' " Well^" said 1, ** if these people 

' This theory, even if it had a basis in fact, manifestly defeats itself. 
For if the Greek landed gentry learned Slav to oblige their serfs and 
tebonrwa^ tlM inlereaoe surdy it that Hmm bttir wen in tlM mjorily. 
But there b no bam of fact The modem Greek finds it no trouble to 
speak three or four languages at once. He would not have forgotten 
his own tongue, even if he had been obliged to acquire Slav. Moreover, 
at the time of the Turkish conquest, Western Macedonia was in the 
hands of the Serbs, and the landed nobility were Slavs. Then, as now, 
the Greeks were probably confined to a few fortified centres like 
Ifelnik (Melenikon). Ifehiik, though it is completely sorrotmded 
by an aggressively Bulgarian rural population, is one oi the most 
munistakably Hellenic centres in all the East. Hidden in a cleft on a 
tnountain side it has defied time, the Bulgarians, and the Turks with 
equal success. It is still a Byzantine town. Its people up till a very 
few years ago were rigidly divided into plebs and patricians who did 
not intemuRy and had little social tnteroonrse. Among the patricians 
such names as Lascaria^ Conmenos^ and Palaedogps are still to bo 
foond* If there had ever been a Greek popolalioii in inland Uace- 



Digitized by Google 



THE GREEKS 



aoi 



are really your brethren, why should you hesitate to receive 

them in your hospital ?" 

The Bishop. They are aU criminals. 

Myself. In what way, your holiness ? 

Ti$e Bishop* They have seized our churches, driven out 
our priestSy and even erased the Greek inscriptions on the 
walls. 

Myself. But, after all, I suppose these churches were 
built by the money and labour of these same peasants ? 

The Bishop, They belonged to the Patriarch. 

Mys^. Perhaps the men have done r^etable things 
but surely you will not reject the women and children 7 

The Bi^top» I would rather they all perished than admit 
one of them to the hospital. They can all come in — ^if they 
will only acknowledge the PSatriarcfa. 

This was not the utterance of religious fonatictsm. It 
was the voice of the dispossessed aristocrat, the dethroned 
l^timist 

The average Greek or Hellenised Vlach in Macedonia, 
who professes to believe that thenriiole population is Greek, 
is doubtless to a great extent the victim of his daily im« 
pressions. He lives In a town which is for the most part 
Hellenised. He Aever goes into the country. He does not 
know the villages or the village folk. But even the more 
educated and moderate Greek, who admits frankly that the 
Macedonians are Slavs, will add a claim on behalf of Greece 
to more territory than her sons inhabit, " in recognition of 
the civilising mission of Hellenism." I confess to some 
difficulty in deciding what Hellenism means in this con- 
nection. What is ^e specific attitude of mind which it 
denotes ? What is the message which the modem Hellenes 
are struggling to convey to Macedonia ? What doctrine of 
sweetness and light is it which causes them to fight for the 
right to bury Vlachs, or to exclude Bulgarians from their 

donia one sees no reason why it should have been less successful in 
maintaining itself than this Byzantine colony at Melnik. The conditions 
there — isolation, distance from the sea, anid alien neighbours — seem 
sufficiently unfavourable. Us survival seems to suggest that thero 
aumot havo been moch die to ninrive. 



Digitized by Google 



202 



MACEDONIA 



hospitals f The Church is the most promineiit feature ol 
modem Hellenism, and it seems to be as far from the old 
Hellenic spirit as it is from primitive Christianity. More- 
over^ it differs in nothing from the Russian^ the Servian, or 
the Bulgarian Churches. Nor is there anything Hellenic 
in the Greek political ideals as one see them in Greece — they 
are the ideals of the French Revolution, and the mother of 
the B00I6 is not the Atibenlan democracy, but the British 
theory of constitutional monarchy and representative 
government And, besides, flie same spirit of democracy 
is incarnated quite as faithfully in free Bulgaria. It would 
be as hard to discover in flie modem Gredcs a trace of the 
ancient artistic spirit Domestic architecture is no doubt 
an impossible luxury in Turkey, for a man who was darmg 
enough to construct an imposing house would invite 
exactions and oppressions. But there is nothing to prevent 
the Greeks from constructing beautiful churches if only 
they possessed the instinct and the taste. Imposing and 
even costly churches one does see ; as, for example, the new 
cathedral at Koritza, but it is vulgar to the last degree. 
There are ambitious new buildings in Athens, but their 
architects were Germans. The popular lithographs, the 
coloured prints of the late war, the illustrated newspapers 
in Athens, all of them belong to a level of perception which 
the poorest English village has outgrown. With music the 
case is even worse. The national manner of singing is a 
monotonous falsetto, indescribably dreary and unutterably 
tuneless. The Church music is no less undeveloped and 
painful, vet any one who has ever had the good fortune to 
henr a chon ul Russian sailors or soldiers going through 
the same orthodox service, as I have hcai d them in Crete, 
knows what its artistic possibilities are in the hands of 
Slav barbarians. When one comes to ask, however, whether 
modern ''Hellenism" includes a devotion to literature, it 
is rather harder to give a definite answer. Certainly the 
Greeks in iMacedonia are not a reading people, but then 
under Turkish rule books are hard to come by. The 
Turkish censorship excludes not merely every book whicii 
contains a syllable that might be consu'ued as a criticism on 



Digitized by Google 



THE GREEKS 



203 



Ottoman institutions or the .\roslein religion ; it bans on 
principle every book that suggests revolt against any 
established order or any recognised Church, Dante is 
forbidden, Pascal's " Peniccs ' are on the index, andacopy 

of " Les Miserables, " which 1 once Iricci to smuggle in, was 
ruthlessly seized — but then the title may have led the 
customs official to mistake it for a treatise on the Mace- 
donians. Such a system, as a Greek bookseller in Monastir 
naively explained to me, is "very cliscouraL^ini^ for the 
trade. ' And the result was that he sold little beside scliool- 
books and the nastiest type of French boulevard novel — for 
moral corruption seems to be the one literary import which 
the censorship encourages. And yet I managed to find in 
his shop Tonrgenict's " Sportsman's Sketches" (in Frcnch)» 
Voltaire's " Cundide," and Lucian's "Dialugues." (There are 
clearly some gaps in the censor's theological hedge.) There 
must have been a public even in Monastir for these books. 
But perhaps the most signilicant thing about this bookshop 
was tliaL wlnle it contained a fair supply of sucli reading, 
and an unrivalled collection of grammars and plirase- books 
for tlie benefit of would-be emigrants to America, Austria, 
and Kou mania, there was virtually nothing in modern 
Greek save calendars, catechisms, and school-books. The 
bookseller explained that he dared not import even Greek 
noveis, and naturally ail Athenian periodicals and news- 
papers — save an innocent sheet published under the censor's 
evL m Smyrna — are articles of contraband. Under such 
conditions it is hardly fair to criticise the achievements of 
Hellenism as a civilising agent in Turkey, iiut certainly it 
is significant of the national attitude, that while the Bulgarian 
schools are modern institutions devoted to science, com- 
merce, and the modern languages, the Greek gymnasia 
favour a purely literary course. The main study is ancient 
Greek, and it is not an uncommon thing to meet a clerk or 
a country solicit(^r who can recite three or four plays, a 
speech or two 01 Demosthenes, and half the Odyssey. 

That a race living under such arduous conditions, 
brutalised by Turkish oppression and internecine strife, 
endowed, moreover, witli keen commercial mstincts, should 



Digitized by Google 



204 



MACEDONIA 



prove itself in its schools 80 little utUitanaOy argues a rare 
intellectual distinctioii and elevation. An unkindly critic 
might analyse the motives that make for this choice ol 
studies, and find promiaent among them a certain national 
vanity which sees in the great literature of the past only a 
sort of sanction for the overweening pretensions of the 
present. But the sense that they have a cloud of witnesses 
behind them in their ancestry, and the imagination which 
makes the great past a very living thing, is a worthy and 
splendid stimulus. Without it there would have been no 
Hellenic revival in the last century, and no war of inde- 
pendence. It lies at the root of that reckless and devoted 
patriotism which is the strong^t passion of the typical 
Greek. On the other hand, this perpetual emphasis on the 
peculiar and exclusive past of the Greek race is the foundap 
tion of much of its prevailing Chauvinism. A Greek who 
has studied the classics conceives himself to be entitled to 
despise his barbarian " neighbour, the Bulgar. The bar* 
barian meanwhile has twen busily and laboriously convert- 
ing himself into a modern Europoan. He has studied 
economics, or it may be natural science^ in Geneva, while 
on the literary side the merest glance through a Russian 
grammar has sufficed to open up to him one of the greatest 
and most humane of modem literatures. For my part I 
am vandal enou^ to think Tolstoi a better influence than 
Demosthenes. 

The Greeks, but for one fatal handicap, would probably 
ht a literary people. They are before all else an imaiginalive 
race. They have quick instincts^ vivid perc^tionsi and 
fluent speech. They think with the eanggeration, the 
emphasis of literature, tiiey have the passion for expression. 
They are acutely aware of language, and grasp with ease 
the conception of style* But this nation of linguists, heirs 
to the speech of Attica, has as yet no language in which to 
express itself. Or, rather, it has two languages. There is, 
first, the popular Greek of daily life, the Romaic of the 
Levant. It is a vivid, expressive speech, full of pithy 
proverbs, apt idioms^ and turns of phrase that betray a keen 
humour and an alert original power of observation. Its 



Digitized by Go 



THE GREEKS 



205 



structure it loose, ^mple, and analytic. Its vocabulary is 
copious, and much less weighted with foreign words than 
any other modem language^ though it does, of course, 
betray by roots of Italian, Vlach, or Turkish origin the 
vicissitudes of the race which speaks it* It stands to ancient 
Greek much as Italian stands to Latin. U is a language 
with a character and a history of its own, which has 
developed, a living, org^c thing, by its own genius and 
its own Uw. It has a literature, not perhaps of surprittng 
force or beauty, but still possessed of some character and 
individuality. The folk-«ongp of the islands, and the war- 
songs of the Klephts and Armatoles reflect with simplicity, 
sincerity, and vigour, the vivid, eventful lives of the men 
who made Greece a nation. They sang as they spoke, in 
words that had a colour, a meaning, an emotional ring 
derived from the accidents and passions of their daily 
existence. Side by side with this free, natural language, 
there has grown up an artificial literaiy language. It is the 
descendant of the stilted jargon written by Byzantine 
schoolmen, and it owes its present authority to the propa- 
ganda of two great patriots who prepared the literary revival 
that preceded the war of independence. While the Klephts 
were singjng their way to victory with their half-savage, 
half-heroic ballads in Romaic, Coraes and Regas, exiles 
in Paris and Vienna were inditing daborate literaiy and 
political tracts in a paeudo-dassic dialect of their own 
invention, in the glorious past they found the inspiration 
of revolt, and they sought to revive with Greek freedom a 
passable imitation of tibe old Greek language. It seemed 
patriotic to banish the words borrowed from Venetians 
or from Turks. It seemed barbarous to use the analytic 
forms of Romaic accidence and the loose constructions of 
Romaic syntax. A movement which invoked such potent 
words as dignity, patriotism, and the glorious past, had a 
speedy success. The result is that there is now one 
language for daily life and lyric poetry, and another for 
books^ new spap er s , advertisements, and formal speeches. 
The difference is not that between the written and spoken 
language of Other countries. We alt use a rather more 



Digitized by Google 



2o6 



MACEDONIA 



studied and periodic style in writm*^, avoid certain vul- 
garisms or neologisms, and employ without fear tif pecimtry 
a lari^er choice of words. The difference between Romaic 
and written Greek is a difference of vocabularv, ot accidence, 
of syntax and even of phonetics. The card m the restaurant 
will offer you oTroc XiVKog and olvoc fdkuf with aprog ad lib., 
but the guests ask for arnrpo Kpatjf, ^tavpo Kpnni and '^w^if 
(white wine, black wine and bread), and if by chance any 
one were to use the printed names, the waiter would treat 
the experiment as a sally ot wit. I once had to send a 
telegram in which I made use of the words Kaivovpio cnr'n 
(new house). No sane Greek in speaking would ever use 
any other combination of words to indicate the same idea. 
But the clerk remonstrated. I must mean vta ofk-'a. And 
when I protested that I wished to telci^raph, not in ancient 
but in modern Greek, he retorted that when he was at 
school he would have been thrashed at a first offence for 
writing o-TrTrt, and expelled for the second. And yet, despite 
its foreign origin, neither he nor any other living man in 
Greece ever dreamed of using in daily speech any word 
save <nriTi (hospitium). It is the name that the child uses 
for his home before he has been taught that the ancients 
had another. No peasant, and few women, would even 
know what oiKia means. The one word has all the associa- 
tions of the mother tongue ; the other, for all that it is Hellenic, 
is foreign and unfamiliar, as colourless as an algebraic 
symbol. For literature the prohibition of the first word is 
disastrous. It means that it has at its disposal no word 
which stirs an emotional echo. It is as though we were to 
erase ''home" from all our poetry and substitute "resi- 
dence." The question of accidence is still more serious. 
Romaic is a language which uses inflections sparingly. It 
has lost the dative altogether, and even tends to discard the 
genitive, while it expresses most relations by a preposition 
governing the accusative. The brigand in the ballad said 
of the sixty Agas ticat/^a ra xwpta rove (I burned their villages). 
The modern purist will write tu)v, or even ain-wv, which, as 
M. Psichari neatly puts it, is much as though a Frenchman 
were to try and improve ^'ai bruU kur viUa^ by writing 



Digitized by Google 



THE GREEKS 



207 



fMomm villages* Worst oi aU, there is no clear understand- 
ing as to how far this process of purification " is to go. 
Each maa is his own academy, and while Romaic has one 
dear way of expressing a simple idea, the purists are not 
agreed on the stilted formula which should take its place.< 
The only safe rule in writing Greek is never to be natural. 
The nearer you can come to the ancient language the better 
do you write, and every eccentricity of grammar becomes 
a beauty of style. The one canon of Greek style is not to 
write as the common people speak; and instead of seek- 
ing distinction in apt words, the purists find it in old ones ; 
instead of aiming at dignity in beautiful rhythms, or in 
phrases that embody some fresh perception or original 
thought, they seek it in stilted and borrowed archaisms. 
Indeed^ the process of reviving not so much Attic as 
Byzantine Greek, has gone so for that one marvds that 
it goes no further. The Archbishop of Athens once wrote 
a sort of circuhr pastoral to the newspapers pointing out 
that if they would only revive one ancient word every day, 
in the course of two or three years their vocabulary would 
be absolutely Attic But somehow the common sense of 
the people seems to shrink from this final systematic effort. 
The results of all this pedantiy upon literature have been 
as deplorable as one might expect A literature which uses 
a language in which no real man ever expressed a human 
emotion is condemned to barrenness and insincerity. 
Goethe translated some Romaic ballads, but who would do 
as much for the Greek poets and novelists of to-day 7 The 
polite language b already so much a foreign tongue, that 
educated Greeks are more and more tending to adopt 
French both for conversation and for writing. French, at 
least, is a natural language^ which is not at the mercy of 
pedants and patriots. 

There is^ of course^ a reaction ag^unst all this folly, but 
it makes way but slowly, since it has against it not only the 
official forces of the Church, the schools, and universities^ 
but also the instinctive vanity of the people. The Greeks 

' See the excellent preface to Pernod's " Grammaire Grecque 
Ifoderoe" (Gsrntor Mtm). 



Digitized by Google 



2o8 



MACEDONIA 



who have attempterl to write in the popular tongue nK stly 
live abroad — M. PMchari in Paris, MM. Pallis and Miciiael- 
ides ("A. Ephtaiiotes ") in Liverpool. They have been 
overwhelmed with abuse as bad patriots and iUiterate 
vulgarians. M. Pallis' translation of the Go'^pels into 
Romaic even led to a bloody riot in Athens, and the 
Ministry of the day was expelled from office becaii^^e it 
had d u cd \o suppress the pr^triotic mob. There is now a 
party of yuung men wh ) v ent i ire to use their own natural 
language, and if among ihem there should prove to be 
a man of qunins who will write a bonk which will ^o 
into every Greek home and commciul it^elt to the b.c.irt 
of the people as a national classic, the battle will Ix \\ n. 
At present the field is vacant. The purists have produced 
no notable writer, and the common people, who simply 
do not understand the panted language, are totally in- 
different to literature. 

The bearing of this Imguistic question on the progress 
of Hellenism in Macedonia is important. If the Greek 
peasant fails as a rule to learn the written l:m'4nrt::[e and 
reads it with difficulty, the case of the hali-Heiicnised 
Albanian, or Vlach, or Bulgarian, is desperate. If he is 
to attain education through the medium of Greek, he 
must learn not one foreign language but two. The talent 
for Inn'^nages is innate among the Balkan races. Greek 
is spoken everywhere in the Levant, and to pick tip a 
colloquial knowledge of spoken Romaic presents no great 
difficulty. The Bulgarian peasants round Castoria (or, 
to be more precise, the men nnuiiiLj them) can all speak 
it more or less well, by dint of usmg all manner of non- 
Hellenic words and taking liberties with the grammar. 
The Levantines of English, French, or Italian origin in 
Smyrna, S il onica, and Constantinople come to speak it 
as a second incitlier-tongue. Rut it is equally useless to 
the peasant as an avenue to education and to the Levantine 
as a commercial lingua franca. For neither the one nor 
the other can WTite it. Indeed, to master Greek oitho- 
graphy one must be something of a cla-sical scholar. To 
take only one iUustration, the sounds which the iwcients 



Digitized by Google 



THB GREEKS 



e]q)ressed by oc, n, % v and 7 are now all pronotinced S» The 
peasant or the foreigner who has picked op the language by 
ear neither knows how to represent these sounds in writing, 
nor can he easily recognise them in print 1 knew a 
Bulgarian in Ochrida, a man who had been wealthy and 
was educated in a Greek gymnasium. We used to talk in 
Greek, and I imagined that he knew the language well, 
until one day he had occasion to write me a letter. There 
was literally not a word from tieginning to end which 
he had contrived to spell correctly. I had another ac* 
qiiaintanoe, a Pole born in Salonica, a man of some 
parts with a decided talent for languages. He wrote both 
French and German correctly. He spoke in addition 
Italian, Hebrew-Spanish, Turkish, Bulgarian, and Greek, 
the last fluently and with some power of picturesque 
expression. But though he had lived all his life as a 
bi»iness man in a Greek commercial centre, he had shrunk 
. from the labour of learning to write a language which 
should have been of immense use and vnlne to him, and he 
did not even know the Greek alphabet The consequence 
is that while Greek is spoken very generally, it is neither 
a satis f a c tory commercial medium, nor a popular vehicle 
for culture. The Vlach, the Albanian, or the Slav who 
acquires it has grave reasons to be disappointed with the 
benefits it gives him. The Greek Imperialist who aspires 
to see his laogua^ once more the recognised speech 
of all civilised men on the eastern shores of the Mediter- 
ranean forgets that the Hellenistic Greek of two thousand 
years ago was the vehicle of an original culture prepared 
by great ^ammarians. 

It is a sorry transition to turn from this dream oi a 
revived Hellenism which is to civilise the Near £astonoe 
more, to the actualities of Greek politics. One may say 
oi the Greeks with equal truth that they are capable 
of superb devotion to an idea, or that they rire the ready 
victims of any catch-word or abstraction. '^The Slav is 
the enemy" is a phrase which their journalists have been re- 
peating to them for the httt thirty years, and at length it has 



Digitized by Google 



210 



MACEDONIA 



obsessed them so powerfully that they have almost forgotten 
their own past and their heroic struggles against Turkish 
tyranny. They have been taught to believe that all Turkey 
south of the Balkans is theirs by right, and they can think 
of the Macedonian movement only as a sort of inv'asion 
of their inheritance planned by the enemy in Bulgaria, if 
not by KubiiLi herself. Thai it can be a spontaneous 
Macedonian movement, that it is a real revolt against 
Turkish tyranny, they will not for a moment beheve. It 
is for them oiily a plot by the foes of Greece against the 
sacred cause of Hellenism. It is from that egoistic stand- 
point that they hold themselves justified in combining with 
the Turks to resist " the Slav." For them these miserable 
peasants, taking arms under any leader who will promise 
them deliverance from the tax-collector and the bev, have 
no concrete existence. They are Slav, and " the Slav 
is the enemy." It is part of the Greek temperament that 
it does riDthinf^ by halves. They flung themselves into 
the new alliance with enthusiasm. In 1903 deputations 
of Greek officers actually visited the Turkish M mister in 
Athens to offer him their swords, and the Greek press 
wrote of Abdul Hamid as though he were a philosopher- 
king and a pillar of Hellenism. Bulgarian refugees 
captured in Thessaly were handed over to the Turkish 
police to be tortured in Turkish dungeons. The Patriarch 
issued an encyclical ordering his Bishops and priests to 
denounce the insurgents and their sympathisers to the 
Turkish ofticials. Every Greek consulate in Macedonia 
became a department of the Turkish secret police, and 
the work of espionage went on unchecked, even while 
the Turks were slaughtermg the Hellenised Vlachs of 
Kruchevo. Kor to the Turk ail Giaours are one. ** There 
are white dogs and red dogs, but all of them are doc^s." 
In fairness to the Greeks we must admit that this policy 
has been followed by their rivals in times past. M. Stam- 
bulov worked steadily for a Turco-Bulgarian entente, and 
undoubtedly he meant to use it against the Greeks. I have 
never heard that he carried it to such an extreme as this — 
the circumstances hardly arose— but there is a nasty story 



Digitized by Googl 



THE GREEKS 



tit 



which accuses him of encour:igin^ M. Tricoupis to develop 
his plan for a Balkan coalition against Turkey, only to carry 
the scheme to Constantinople on the eve of its execution.' 
No sense of chivalry prevented the Bulgarians from proiiling 
by the reverses of Greece in 1897. But apart from the 
morality of this Greek policy or tiie amount of provocation 
which might be held to justify it, it is an extremely fouiish 
venture. It had no doubt a certain brief and superficial 
success. It was easy to force a Bulgarian notable to call 
himself a "Greek" by threatening to denounce him to the 
Turks, and the Archbishop of Castoria won many villages 
for the Patriarch in this way. Wiien that failed, a Bishop 
had only to go on tour among the villages vvith an immense 
" escort " of Turkish troops, as the Bishops of Serres and 
Fiorina did, " converting" them by force. As a last resort, 
in one case at least, the Bishop of Serres even arrested 
a Bulgarian priest and kept him a prisoner in his own 
palace, only releasing him when he renounced the Exarch. 
But these are ephemeral triumphs. The "converted" 
villa<^ts still maintain their sly commerce with the Com- 
mittee, still harbour "bands," still talk Bulgarian. And 
assuredly they do not love " Hellenism " the more. Worst 
of all, the loyal Greek and Vlach villages are puzzled and 
impatient. They saw their Slav neighbours marching out 
to fight the traditional enemy, and they wished to join 
them. "You know we too have rities, and we want to use 
them," said a young man of Klissoura to me one day. 
"Against whom?" I asked. "Why, ai^ainst the Turks, 
of course. We arc only waiting for Greece to tell us to 
move." And he went on, in the same tongue, the same 
accents that the mountaineers of Crete have used so often 
in my hearing, to explain how intolerable life was under 
Turkish rule. The policy which prompted Greece to use 
the occasion only to weaken Bulgaria while the chance 
of freedom "^lipped by, was quite beyond his comprehension. 
He, too, wanted autonomy, and he could not understand 

* TUs tele nmj be a calmnny. IC. Triooopis almp deided that he 
had attempted to bring about an a]UanGe^tQBiilgttia(8ee Nicolaides, 
La Uacedoine," p. 903). 



Digitized by Google 



212 



MACEDONIA 



why Greece should claim it for Crete and oppose it in 
Macedonia. It is only the official or the educated Greek 
who prefers anarchy and the status quo to any surrender 
of the grotesque territorial claims of Hellenism over the 
Bulgarian interior. The average Greek official vowing 
in one breath that all the Macedonians are Greeks, and 
declaring in the next thai he would rather have them 
massacred than governed by a iiulL^ai i:in majoriiv, is 
paiiiiully like ilie talse mother in Soioinon's judgnici^t, 
who was quite ready to aiiow the other womaii's ciiiid 
to be cut III two. 

The immediate result of the Greek policy of espionage 
and denunciation, so lightly planned in Athens and Con- 
stantuiuplc, was to expose the Greeks of Macedonia — or, to 
be more accurate, the villagers of the Greek party — to the 
fury and revenge of the Bulgarian Committee. If a Bishop 
had frightened a village into joining the Patriarchist Church 
by holding the fear of the Turks over its head, it was 
always po>>ilMc tor the next Bulgarian band which came 
that way to compel it to return \o the Exarchist schism, by 
threatening to burn it to the ground. The one method was 
as legitimate as the other, and quite as efficacious, if a 
Greek priest in obedience to his Bishop's instructions had 
betrayed a group of insuri^ent^ to the Turks, there were 
always comrades left to come round and hang him from 
the nearest tree. The next stage in the evolution of party 
feehng was naturally that the Greeks came to think of the 
Bulgarians as wild beasts, who slaughtered from mere lust 
of blood. Legitimi-^ts always, they seemed to regard their 
own work of denunciation as an unexceptionable use of the 
weapons of law and order. The Bulgarians, after all, are 
rebels, and the Greeks as loyal subjects of Abdul Hamid 
were only setting the machinery of justice in motion. The 
Turks, however, have failed to protect them, and they had 
to devise some more effective plan for defending themselves. 
The scheme was to organise counter^batida to hold the 
Bulgarians in check. 1 had the chance to meet in Monastir 
in March, emissary from the Greek Government 

who was preparing this scheme. He was travelling as a 



Digitized by Google 



THE GR£1::KS 



21J 



cattle-dealer under an assumed name, but I had known him 
first in a European university where we were undergraduates 
together, and again in the East. He comes of an influential 
family, and is himself a man of a certain magnetism and 
wayward talent, who has had some experience as a guerilla 
chief. The climate of Macedonia seemed to have trans- 
formed him. He talked his French, his English, and his 
German as fluently as ever, but the ideas he < x]:n cssed — as 
far as the pale vocabulary of these languages would allow 
him — were the ideas of his Phanariot ancestors. In the 
name of Hellenism he proposed to make of Macedonia 
a shambles and a desert. Where the Bulgarians had 
murdered one man, he declared, he would slaughter ten. 
He shrank only from one thing — he would not imitate what 
he described as the " anarclll^^t " methods of the Committee. 
He would not arm hts men with dynamite. But all manner 
of straightforward bloodiness with lead and steel came into 
his programme. And yet he was firmly convniced that he was 
fightmg for " culture," for " ideas/' for " a superior civilisa- 
tion," against the Bulgarian "wolves."' The earth might 
be a very tolerable place to live in, if every abstract word 
could be eliminated from human speech. Mephistopheles 
must have been fresh from a visit to the Balkans when he 
told Jehovah that mankind have used the reason which He 
gave them to become more beast-like than any beast. 

9 * * * * 

This armed Greek propaganda, planned in the spring of 
1904, has since been developed with much energy and a 
total disregard for humane scrupiesi and its result has been 

• 

* As a niatter of history the Greeks have been neither more nor less 

humane than other Balkan people. The War of Independence was a 
dialogue of massacre in which outrage answered to outrage. The 
Cretans perpetrated a whtdesale msssacre at the eicpeiiae of the 
Moslem minority in the eastern (Sitia) districts of the island in 1897. 
I saw with my own eyes young Moslem ^♦irls who had escaped 
rautilatcci from these horrors. During the Thessaiian camp.iigii of 
18^ I was present when an Evzone raiment strung ap a Turkish 
prisoner by his heels from a tree, and proceeded to lay a fire of wood 
and straw under his head. Fortunately he promised to ^ve them 
valuable intennation before the fire wtM actoally lit, ana at that 
moment some Italian officers of the Foreign Legion appeared 00 tht 
•oenOt 



Digitized by Google 



214 



MACEDONIA 



that, despite the self-restraint of the Bulgavian Committee 
and the reforming efforts of the Powers, Macedonia has 
passed during some ei^teen months throu^ a period of 
anarchy without paralld in its recent annals. Officially, tiie 
object of the Greda in establishing bands was defensive : 
fbej intended to reply to Bulgarian violence by a counter 
terrorism, to maintain their footing in the country and to 
protect the lives and property of their adherents. In point 
of fact they have conducted an aggressive warfisure against 
all the other Christian elements, Bulgarians, Vlachs, and 
even Albanians, with the object of checking every national 
movement save their own, and of conquering for Hel- 
lenism as much oi tiie country as they can overrun. Their 
methods have been as.-jab.'iinLLtioii and even iiKiss.ici c, while 
their task has been facihtatcd by the tolerance and the 
conniv.mce of the Turks. Unlike the Bulgarians, they have 
estabhshed no local organisation. Their work is controlled 
by the "Macedonian Syllogos" of Athens, which enjoys 
within certain limits the approval of the Greek Government ; 
and its agents in Macedonia have been the Greek Bishops 
and consuls. Their bands consisted of mercen.u ics, well 
paid and well armed, recruited in Crete, in Smyrna, and in 
the Greek kingdom. Few of them were composed to any 
large extent of Macedonians, but in some cases, even by 
the admission of Greek newspapers, they enrolled local 
Turks. The leaders were often officers of the Greek army, 
but the more successful among them seein to have been 
brigand-chiefs from the mountains of Olympus and the 
Greek frontier. In two instances they were old Bulgarian 
leaders who had quarrelled with the Committee and 
accepted Greek pay. They have worked on a large scale, 
passing the Greek frontier without difficulty, and even 
effecting a descent by sea upon the coast of Chalddice* 
Sometimes they came into conflict with Bulgarian bands^ 
but as in these cases the newspapers of both sides have 
usually claimed the victory, it is difficult to ascertain the 
truth. Their instructions were to avoid encounters with 
the Turks, and usually there has been no dilHculty on this 
head. Sometimes the Turkish officers were bribed f in two 



Digitized by Google 



THE GREEKS 



cases they received the Gretk decoration of the Order of the 
Redeemer. A few skiiimshes have none the less taken 
place (notribly one in which C^iptaui rvklas was kilied), but 
usually by mistake, and these ended for the most part in the 
surrender of the Greeks, and a trial for form's sake, toiiowed 
by a few months' imprisonment. 

But the ami of these bands is not military : they are 
engaged in ''propaganda," and here they have achieved a 
very considerable success. They murdered the Albanian 
priest of Negovan for the crime of translating the Greek 
liturgy into Albanian. They have executed a fair number 
of Vlath priests and teachers because they attempted to say 
Mass or teach the children in Roumanian. The Bulgarian 
population has been reduced by some hundreds, and a large 
number of Vlach (Roumanian) villages have been "con- 
verted" from their schism and enrolM once more in the 
Greek Church.' To employ violence against Bulgarians 
was, after all, only to adopt the law of retaliation, but the 
Vlachs have done nothing to provoke soch usage. They, 
at least, have never enrolled bands or essayed terrorism* 

An extract from a Greek newspaper EmproSf September 5, 
I905» which happens to be edited by the acting president 
of the Macedonian Syllogos^ describes with a naive 
euphemism the evang^ical methods which the apostles 
of Hellenism and Orthodoxy have employed to convert 
the Bulgarian peasantry* 

" We have just learned a most important piece of news from 
an entirely reliable source. A Hcllcuo- Macedonian band, composed 
of eighty men commanded by the chiefs Vlakouris and Thiaphis, 
anived last Saturday in the schismatic village of MokrcnL It 
carried off twenty-five schismatics and took them to a place near 
Mount Kooh . From this centre the two chiefs despatched an order 
to the villagers of llokrenioomnuuiding them to tend the priest and 
Ifae »i^*tnr>atm of tfao Tiltage, ttiider a tlinat to massacre the twenty- 



' "Captain Boukovrtin hrr^ cinscd several T^minnnising villages in the 
Ca/ i of Yenidje to return to Orthodoxy" (the Sknp, Athens, August 31, 

^^lianks to the action of the Chief Akridas and his band, the 
Roumanising popnlntion of Selion, Vlacolivadon and of the villages 
round Vodena has rejected the alluring propositions of the Roumanian 
propaganda and returned to Orthodoxy" (the Aihcnm, August 31, 1905). 



Digitized by Google 



2l6 



MACEDONIA 



five hostages unless their order was instantly obeyed. The priest 

and the headman arrived shortly aftcrwnrd? in the camp. Captain 
Vlakouris made them a long speech lu which he required them 
to retaro to Orthodoxy with all thdr fiock. The priest, the heed* 

man, and the prisoners were fired with such enthusiasm by the 
words of Criptnin VHtikouris that they swore to renounce their 
schism. Oil receiving this assurance the captain released them 
all Next day the Greek band returned to the villige and tVM 
received with the utmost cordiahty. A Te Deum was sung in 
the Greek Church, which up to that moment had been closed, 
and at the eod ot the ceremony all the villagers swore an oath 
of fidelity to Orthodoxy. Captain Vlakouris, alter leaving twelve 
of his men in the village of Mokrcni, set out with the rest of his 
band for Zelenitch and Aetos, two villages which he also proposes 
to bring back to Orthodo^r/* 

\ "To reconstruct this scene it is necessary to remember 
j that Mokreni is a purely Bulgarian village, that its men 
proved their devotion by taking a share in the Bulgarian 
! rising of 1903, that it was then burned to the ground 
, by the Turks, and that it lies at the foot of the mountain 
; on which stands Klissoura, in sight of a Turkish garrison 
; and a Turkish sub-prefect. It would be possible^ no 
I doubt, to parallel such performances as this from the 
i annals of the Bulgarian bands, but they, after all, confined 
1 themselves to ^'converting" their own oompatriots; they 
I have never attempted to terrorise genuine Greek villages 
j in this fashion. Moreover, the Greeks have resorted to 
: wholesale massacre as the Bulgarians have never done. 
: There are few Bulgarian villages in the debatable cen- 
i tral districts which have not been visited during the 
I year 1905 by some Greek band which has left behind it 
', its twos and threes or its ten or a dozen of schismatic 
1 corpses,' sacrificed in the process of the ceremony 
. of conversion. Flic chef (rcric'rc of this Hellenic cam- 
; paij^n w.is acliieved at Za^oi ilchani, :i huge Bulgarian 
{ village HLMi Klissoura, which, Hke Mokreni, took a leading 
[ part in the ribiiig of i<)0}, and Hke Mokreni was burned by 
; the Turks. A Greek band^ which is said to have numbered 
I over two hundred men under three Greek officers m 
i uniform, surprised it by night (April 6-7, 1905) by using 

' Seventeen were nuttsacnd tt Kkdotiiibi, t60A killod sad fiftsea 
wottDdod At Zflfliiitffli I 



Digitized by Google 



THE GREEKS 



217 



bogle calls which led the villagers to suppose that Turkish 
regulm were manceuvring in the neighbourhood. They 
burned ten houses, and twenty-ei^ht of the temporary 
homes erected amid the ruins of the l ist conflagration. 
They wounded seven persons and killed no less than sixty, 
among them seven woiiitu, twenty-two persons over sixty 
years of age, and five chiklien under fifteen.' There was 
a ijood deal of evidence to show that the local Turkish 
authorities were privy to this massacre, and some circum- 
stances seemed to inculpate the Archbishop of Castoria. 
It is quite clear that no conflict or provocation preceded 
what was simply a deliberate massacre, and the only reason 
for choosinL; Z;ic^oritchani was that it is an eager and 
patriotic buigaruiri centre, and that it had disobeyed the 
summons of the Greek ArchbiLliop to return to the 
Patriarchist fold.'' The progratume of the Greek organisa- 

' I have had corroboration of these figures and of the other details 
given above in a private letter from a gentleman who bad seen the 
reports of the Italian gendarmerie officer and the Civil Afjents. 

■ The koumame of Bucharest has published the text of a drcuiar 
focind by the Tnrk3 in some docoments seized on the person of e Greelt 
risoner. It reads like a genuine Greek document, and its authenticity 
as not been questioned by the Greek organs. It is aud. to bear 
the seal of the Greek Committee. 

" Brave defenders of Hellenism, I address yon to-day in order to 
eiqiress the gratitude which the entire nation feels for all you have 
done and will yet do on behalf of the Fatherland. Continue the 
stru^le against the Bulgarian assassins, and neglect no means of 
proving to the whole world that Macedonia is purely Greek. Extermi- 
nate the priests, the teachers, and the notables who compose the 
Bulgarian Committees. It is at length time toput in oractice the 
saying : an eye foran eye, a tooth for a tooth, when it b a qoestkm 
of taking vengeance we must not spare the Bulgarians, even when 
they hide under the robes of a priest. Burn, shoot, assassinate, and 
purify the soil of Macedonia from all that is Exarchist The Supreme 
PanheUenic Conunittee has decided to Intensify the struggle by making 
use of your arms, O valiant combatants, and if for some lime past the 
Committee has hardly seemed equal to the occasion, the reason is that 
ofiicial Greece hcikitates. But what is ofiicial Greece to us, wiien wc 
have the approbation of the whole Hellenic world ? Forward, then, 
until vou have wiped nnt the la^t Bulgarian in nur Micedonia. YottT 
names will be inscribed in letters ot lire in the aanals of the race. 
May Heaven grant that the day l>e near when the son of HeUenism 
will shine on Macectonia ; then there will be peace for os and for the 
Turks, with whom we stand on the best of terms. Let our motto be : 
Purge Macedonia ot the Bulgars. ' I quote from M. Gauiui' admirable 
paper, La Maeidotne, 



Digitized by Google 



i 



218 



MACEDONIA 



tion is clearly to pro?e that Macedonia is Greek by ezter> 
minating the Bidganans. The worst d this practical 
eflinography is that it leaves so many corpses to testify 
to the contrary fiiests. Both sides have resorted on occa* 
sion to Machiavellian tactics ; both sides have been guilty 
of savagery. But the Bulgarians at least have not com- 
mitted the crime of UseMberti; and the Greda alone^strangers 
and mercenaries engaged in the conquest of an a^en 
people, have imitated Turkish methods of massacre,* It 
is as always flie peasantry who suffer. By tiie autumn 
ol 1905 a reign of terror had settled down on the whole 
of Central Macedonia. Tillage was interrupted, the roads 
deserted, and round Vodena the population of no less than 
nine Bulgarian villages had abandoned their homes and 
flocked into the town in search of some refuge from the 
Greek hands. Were these peo[)lc iii^rtyi>, and fanatics 
by choice, their miseries might liave their ideal compensa- 
tions. But halt the men and most of the women would 
welcome tranquillity beneath any Hag, and call themselves 
Manchub or Hottentots if under these names they mit^ht 
plough their Belds undisturbed and tramp to market without 
fear of assassination. 



It is not in Macedonia that the Greeks are seen to the 
best advantage. There they have degenerated into a race of 
townsmen, who form an ignoble aristocracy of t Jent, half 
clerical, half commercial, which exploits an alien peasantry 
that it despises. The true Greek is to be sought m the 
Highlands and the Isles. could wish that my acguaint- 
ance with the Greeks had endc^ flr^^*1i t''^***-^ «tiP 



• The assassination of Vlachs by the Greek bands aroused the most 
violent indignation in Roumania. The Roumanians arc not quite so 
much inored to blood as the Greeks and Bulgarians, and they have 
always conducted their propaganda by the clean and benevolent method 
of bribery. They retaliated by cxpielling some Greek subiects from 
Roumania. A diplomatic oonflict followed, and in Octclser, 1905, 



impossible, but Greek commerce in Roumania is certain to he very 
heavily punished. Some good has come already from this situation, 
since oraers have been issoed from Athens forbidding the Greek braves 
for the future to murder Vtadis. 



* 



* 



peaceful relations were broken off. 




1 

Digitized by Google 



THE GREEKS 



219 



may meet a Greek p< "^pk, primWw^ l^iraKI^^ ramAAtiA to ttig 
so il, whose comtesy, hosp ital i ty, an d native di^n i ty cen- 
turies of oppression have not ^frYej:j;ed. Living in daily 
commerce wi.th. the mountai ns and the sea-hj:edie§,Jg^aging 
a warfare that^ knew no compromise with, the ir sec ular' 
enemy the Tur]^ they know nothing of those elaborate dis- 
royalties, those perverting feuds which have corroded the 
honour and the humanity of their Continental brethren. 
For them HellenisLiiL is a simple ideal ui liberty^ untainted 
by policy, unstained by any base aUiance. It is no matter 
of controversy or polemics. It is a legend, a faith to which 
even the powers of nature do homage. Their very fairies 
are Greeks, and the very winds that toss their barks are 
the servants of Hellenism and its hero Alexander. When 
their fishing-boats are buffeted by the wind — so the island 
folk believe — the Queen of the Nereids, who is Alexander's 
sister, dances in the foam about their prow, anxious and 
troubled of mien. But the seamen look her in the face and 
answer her dumb inquiry with the age-old formula, " Thy 
brother Alexander lives and reigns." And so it is. Where 
Hellenism is still married to its barren rocks and the waves 
that cradled it, it lives triumphant and unspoiled. Its 
decadence is only in the ghettos and bazaars and the 
breathless city lanes. 



§ GasBK SrATisnGS. 

A favourite line of argument with Greeks is based opon a comparison 

of their school-statistics with those of the Bulgarians. This is really a 
very elaborate sophistication which requires some space to unravel. 
They claim that in what they are pleased to call " Macedonia " there 
are 998 "Greek" schools attended by 59,600 pupils, as a^iinst 561 
Bulgarian schools attended by 18,300 pupils. These figures may or 
may not be accurate, but the following considerations rob them of 
any importance. 

(i) The definition of " Macedonia " is quite arbitrary. The Greeks 
mean by the term the two vilayets of Salonica and Monastir. This is 
at once too much and too Uttle. It includes the purely Albanian 
districts of Elba«ui and Kbrita, where the Christians, altnongh they 
attend "Greek" Orthodox schools, are all Albanians. It excludes the 
vilayet of Uskuh, obviously because it would be hard to tind in it a 
single native Greek family. It is, with the exception of the Albanian 
and Sanrian districts of the west, eatinly Bnlfuian. 



L 



Digitized by Google 



210 



MACEDONIA 



(2) Even in the two selected vilayet- t!ie population of the " Greek " 
villages of the central districts is either Slav or Vlach ; and even 
cfailOTen who have attended a " Greek" school frequently leaire it with 
no real knowledge of the langntge. 

(3) The fact that a Slav villa^^e posses'^es only a "Greek" school dof»3 
not even prove that its sympathies are Ureck. Smerdesh, for example, 
wfaicli is vtieiitly Bulgarian in polHict, is still almost wholly Greek** 
in culture. The Greeks have every historical advantage, and it is 
safer for a prudent village to profess itself patriarchist. If it becomes 
Exarchist it at once exposes itself to the suspicion if not to the pci^c- 
cution of the Turkish authorities. 

(4) The Greeks are the wealthy town popnl ition, and in addition 
they possess the accumulated wealth of the moua:>teries, so that wher- 
ever a village wiU accept a Greek" tchool they have the meam to 
plant one. The Bulgarians, on the other hand, are a rude peannt 
people, with less need of education, less desire for it, and less wealth 
wiih which to procure it. A large proportion of their villages are still 
without any school worthy of me name, and I have known villages 
where not a single inhabitant could read or write. But the most potent 
factor in delnynig the development of the Bulgarian schools is the 
hostility of the Turks, from which the Greeks do not suUer. 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by GoogI 



1 




I 

Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VIII 



THB ALBANIANS 

{ I.— Tub Albanian Charactbr. 

'T'HERE is no race in European Turkey which enjoys 
collectively a reputation quite so unenviable as that of 
the Albanians. They arc the bctcs noircs of the Embassies, 
the scapegoats of. thj£ Pprte. M anywhere the Turks are 
engaged in punitive operatipnsjl.is a njere matter ot routine 
that some or all of the Ambassadors should protest a^iast 
the employment of Albanian troops. I f anywhere exces ses 
have been committed whic h even the Sultan cajy^ot deny, the 
hievitable ixgus§. is. tliat the Albanians "got nut ol -hand." 
One suspects that the first exercise of a diplomatic tyro is to 
drift these warnings with the dates blank for future use, 
Bnd the first essay of a probationer in the Grand Vizier's 
office to turn the hackneyed exculpatory phrases with the 
requisite note of surprised and horrified humanity. For a 
century past this ill name was the only herald which 
brought the Albanians to the knowledge of the West. We 
heard of them when their massacres threatened to extermi- 
nate the Greek race in the Morea. We hetird of them 
when France and England intrigued lor the friendship ol 
All Pasha» each lascinated by his reputation lor super* 
human cruelty and cunning. We heard of them again as 
the race whose exactions and oppressions in ''Old Servia'' 
rm with the peiidnnances of the Kurds in Armenia. And 
the Blue-Book (1904) which recorded the atrocities in 
Macedonia and Adrianople fits the Albanian name once 
more into the familiar context ol execration and oompbnnt 

au 



Digitized by Google 



222 



MACEDONIA 



Of all their vagae political asfMrations and obscure strivings 
nothing seems to have been known save the one damning 
fact that they had risen to protest against the refonns* It 
has been their late to hide their virtues under an aiiaSf and 
to commit only their crimes and errors in their own name* 
Whether as Christians or as Moslems tfieir lot has been to 
win laurels for other races. How mu^ of the g reat legend 
of the Greek War o f Indfipendence would remain if the 
share which the Christian Albanians had m it were sub* 
tracted ? When one thinks of that various struggle, some- 
times savage, sometimes heroic, two cluiptcrs emerge which 
have specially seized Ihc imagination of Europe — the wars 
of Suli against Ali Pasha,_ao.d.the.exploits pf_ the seamen of 
Hydra against the 1 urkish. joayy. Both the Suliotes and 
Hydriotes were Albaiuaiui in blood» language, and^customs. 
They were "Greeks" only in the sense that the Vlachs^are 
Greeks" — they belonged to the Orthodox Churcli, and if 
any of them possessed any culture at all, it was Greek 
culture. The Suliotes were a predatory trih£,-Lath€r better 
organised and more homogeneous than most Albanian 
septs, and theii* manners had not been softened by their 
nominal Christianity, The Hydrio tt^ were simpjxP'r'ite'^. 
liie heroism and tenacity which both displayed as tlicir 
normal opposition to the Turks deepened under Greek 
intiuence into a struggle for political liliertv, have cast a 
lustre and a glory upon the whole war wiiich ouqht hy 
every law of historical justice to modify the judgment whicli 
civilisation has passed upon the Albanians. As the Christian 
Albanians have worked for the g^ter glory of the Hellenic 
idea, so the Mohamedan Albanians have contributed to 
such sympathy as the Turks can still command in the 
West The word ** Turk " in our language has a racial 
rather than a religious connotation. But in the languages of 
the East it is simply a ^nonym for Mohamedan. The 
Greeks, for example, even speak of the Moslems of Crete as 
^* TurkSy" although they are Hellenes by race and language 
who can rarely speak more than a very few words of 
Turkish. And so it is with the Albanians* All over Turkey 
they are to be found in positions which bring them into 



Digitized by Google 



THE ALBANIANS 



223 



contact with Europeans. They are sometimes governors^ 
often military offioersy while the typical trade of the lower 
dass is that of caoasSf i^f armed servant^ half couriery 
half bodyguard, in the pay of some Eoropean or wealthy 
native* llie soperb men in picturesque garb, decorated 
with a bewildering variety of wei^ns, who lounge at the 
doors of consulates and bsmks, who carry money or mes- 
sage or hire themselves out to escort travellers, are 
invariably Albanians. But because they are nominal 
Moslems the hasty traveller classes them as Turks, and goes 
home to spread abroad the fame of their fidelity, their self- 
respect, their courage^ and thdr sense of honour-dualities 
which somehow truisform themselves into so many argu- 
ments for the continuance of Ottoman rule. I once 
travelled over one of the Macedonian railway lines with 
a young Englishman of wealth and position who was 
making a tour of the Near Bast as a preparation for a 
parliamentary career. He had no very settled convictions, 
but at every turn of the conversation he broke into eulogies 
of the individual " Turk." At last I asked him on what he 
based his judgment. "Well," was the answer, " look at my 
servant." The man turned out to be a characteristic 
Albanian — tall, handsoiiic, :uid doubtless as honest and 
brave as his eyes were frank and fearless, while his whulc 
bearing conveyed that suggestion of mingled courtesy and 
independence which makes the peculiar charm of his race. 
It seemed a hard fate that his tine qualities should all the 
wlule be winning a partisan lor an Asiatic despotism which 
every good Albanian despises and detests. 

For in sharp contrast to the reputation which the 
Albanians li:ive won for themselves collectively, is the 
regard in which they are held as individuals not only by 
Europeans but by other native races in the Balkans. As 
tribesmen they may be inveterate and reckless bni;;mds, 
whose annual incursions into the richer regions oi the 
Macedonian borderland are the natural consequence of 
their contempt for any tool save the rifle. As soldiers they 
are the terror alike of their Turkish officers, whom they de- 
spii>e, and of the Christian populations, whom they terrorise* 



Digitized by Google 



314 



MACEDONIA 



Bat them onoe mbandon the tprolettioii ol ims and 
immediately tbeir simple feudal vktiies aeem to win tliem 
patrons and even admirers. They are iraloed all over 
Macedonia as masons or navvies — these men who would 
scorn to turn a sod in their own country. They are cun* 
ning crsftunen, and in silver work display not only deiterity 
hot taste. In positions of trust their honesty is as prow^ 
bial as their courage. The most timid Levantine merchant 
will confide to them his money and his life if only Ihey have 
given their word to be true. The unsophisticated Turfcisfa 
peasant— a very difiEerent man from the nondescript Moslem 
Levantine of the towns*— is usually both honest and truth- 
ful, but one feels that his virtues spring in no small degree 
from his notorious lack of enterprise and imagination. The 
key to the Albanian temperament is, on the other hand, a 
sensitive and somewhat aggressive pride. At its lowest it is 
a picturesque and amiable vanity, at ils best it is a fine self- 
respect He has the same quickness of wit, the same tense 
nerves as the Greeks and the same spirit of enterprise. But 
his pride saves him alike from cowardice and from mean- 
ness. He will rob openly and with violence, but he will 
not steal. . He will torture an enemy, but he will not touch 
a woman. If he swaggers and boasts and puts a certain 
tniculence into his very dress, he has much too high an 
opinion of himself to lie meanly in self-defence. He has 
the traditions of a race which has fought for the Turk as 
his mercenaries, but has never accepted his domestic rule 
without protest. An Albanian's sense of honour is not 
entirely external, lie will murder you without remorse if 
he conceives tliat vou have insulted iiun — asTurkish ofticers 
iincl Kussiaii consuls iiave learned to their cost — and if the 
nun derei, a lunely outlaw, should find his way even to a 
strange and possibly iiostile tribe, it will Eght to the last 
man raiiier than surrender him to tlie authorities.' But he 

' It is pretty penerally understood in Turkevthat it is death to strike 
an Albaaian. But occa^naliy a Turkish ollicer forgets himself. A 
case occorred at Vodeaa in the somnMr of 1904* and the whole garrisoa 
went into matiBj imtU it had foond and alanghlerad the erring 
Ueulenaat 



Digitizpci hv C 



THE ALBANIANS 



225 



is equally punctiUont about his own pledged word. To 
keep it he will face any risk himself, and to help htm to 
keep it, his tribe will think no sacrifice extravagant. It is 
extremely mediaeval, no doubt, this Albanian sense of 
honour, but if it has the crudity and bloody>mindedness, it 
has also the chivalry and something of the inward dignity 
of the knightly spirit. 

An incident which made a profound impression on me 
will serve to show better thnn any testimony \n general 
terms what is the usual attitude towards the Albanians of 
tlioac who know them best. It v.'as necessary m the course 
of the relief \\ ork undertaken by the British Fund in Mace- 
donia last winter to send large sums of money in gold from 
Monastir to Ochnda, Resna, and other places where we had 
centres. The usual method was to send our Albanian 
cavass, a lad named Hassan, on horseback over the 
mountains with his rifle on his shoulder and the money 
in his belt. No one ever seemed to question his trust- 
worllaness. He earned first small sums and then large, 
and there was never a penny missing. He liad arrived one 
day in Ochrida with a matter of £400, and he stood while 
1 counted it with hi.^ air of ingenuousness and quiet scli- 
confidence which sugj^ested an English public schoolboy 
rather than a Balkan peasant. It was a face that no one 
could fail to trust, kindly and gentle yet spirited, with its 
blue eyes and the blonde hair that might have been Enghsh 
or Norse. The money was right, as usual, and something 
which we had to discuss caused me to ask Hassan it he 
knew the whereabouts of a certain house in Ochrida — 
rambling city of dark lanes and deserted bvways, half ruins, 
half streets. He smiled at the question, lie knew every 
inch 01 the town. There was something huuiorons in the 
twinkle of his eye winch made me ask how that could be. 
He came from a distant part, and had lived for a year 
or two in Monastir. And then, trank, uidMushing, and 
delightfully natural, he gave the answer, " 1 was with 
Shahin." 1 found myself instinctively, stu}»idlv fearing for 
the money-bags on the table, for Shahin (the falcon) was 

the most Df^^^KU r.( oll hriganrf« in thft fiftun^sifl^, a 

Q 



Digitized by Google 



226 



MACEDONIA 



sort ftf P>^htn Hnnrij orlin rnhkh^A xuiih arf and mi^.^'^r^ 

wiUi irony. He was in some »ort tb*^ nnnrowned tyrant of 
these regions. Young galUnts who could not win a con^ 
sent from an3nsympathilk.4M^ flie 
lady of their heart went to Shahin to force it. He once 
held up to ransom a Protestant missionary whose brother 
was in the very hou-c in winch we were sittinj^. Every 
village had its own talc oi Shahin's justice oi Shj.h;n s 
cruelty. And Hassan had been a memb er of hi s band, 
learning the topogr aphy of Qchrida in mi d night raids and 
ambijiscades at dawn. 

I told the story to a friend. "Why should you distnist 
the lad?" sui he. "Brigandage is a profession like 
another. While he was a brigand he was true to the band ; 
while he is in your stirvice lie will be true, to you." And 
indeed Hassan himself had made his avowal much as an 
English youth might have said, " I served in the Imperial 
Yeomanry'' or "I was with LkidLii-Pow^ell." But most 
significant of all was the laconic question with which a 
fUil^arum Bishop replied to my inquiry. "Would you 
trust him ?" I asked. " He is an Albanian. Is he not ?'* 
was the answer. For centuries the Sla\'s and the Albanians 
have been in deadly, unremitting feud. And here was the 
comment of one enemy on the character of the other. 

Has^n was a peasant and a Mohamedan. But we had 
even better opportunities of gauging the qualities of oth^ 
Albanians^ who belonged to every Christian sect and to the 
most various levels of culture. There was no intention or 
consciousness behind it, but none the less when I count 
over the natives who assisted us in one capacity or another 
in our seven relief tUpSts, I find that there were fifteen 
Albanians and only six of other races, and of these six only 
two were in responsible positions, and one of the two 
proved to be unsuitable. Of the fifteen Albanians, only 
one ever earned the lightest reprimand, and though th^ 
handled many thousands of pounds among them, I would 
guarantee the scrupulous honesfy of every man of 
them. I remember going on my arrival to one of the 
Protestant missionaries to ask him to recommend me 



Digitized by Google 



THE ALBANIANS 



227 



some honest assistants for the purchase and distribution 
of food, blankets, clothing, &c. He was quite sure that 
he could do so — Protestantism in his eyes was the one 
ji^uarantee of honesty. When his list was complete I 
noticed that every name in it was Albanian, which was 
odd, since the Protestant mission is supposed to be a 
mission to Bulgarians. The Catholic priest was equally 
sure that honesty is incompatible with Eastern Christianity, 
and he too was t ddy to produce the one honest native in 
Monastir, of course, a Catholic. When it turned out that 
this man also was an Albanian, I felt no small relief. Here 
at length is a race which neither religion nor education can 
corrupt. In the end our Albanian staff incluclecl Moslems, 
"Greeks," Protestants, and Catholics. I tlimk one of the 
bravest men I have ever known was one of the Protestants\ 
He had a superb physique, but he had been born in a 
town and had never carried arms. At the time when the 
Turkish authorities in Castona were molesting the Bulgarian 
peasants who came into our hospital, beating some of them, 
detaining others, and carrying off a few against their will to 
the Turkish ambulance, I sent this man to take his stand at 
the gate of the town, and inform me at once if any violence 
was offered to our proUgh, He had not long to wait, but 
instead of losing time while he ran for me, he dealt with the 
situation himself. He marched boldly, unarmed " Giaour '* 
though he waSp into the midst of the Turkish soldiers and 
gendarmes, rescued the Bulgarian peasants by main force 
and escorted them triumphantly to our hospital. The 
possession of a rifle will often make a man of a Bulgarian 
insuigenty but only an Albanian could have showed such 
courage as this, unarmed, against a crowd of Turks with 
weapons. But there are in the Albanian nature even rarer 
capacities than this. Honesty and courage in different 
d^rees are the possession of all true mountaineers. The 
Albanian Sisters of the Order of St. Vincent de Paul, who 
worked at Monastir under the direction of a French 
superior, and in our Castoria hospital under an English 
lady. Sister Augustine, g^ve proof of a rare devotion. Born 
in a country where no woman dreams of any sphere outside 



Digitized by Google 



228 



MACEDONIA 



the home that is almost a haremt they had imbibed all the 
spirit of practical charity and disciplined kindliness which 
distingnidies their Order. They shrank neither from 
exposure nor infection nor fatigue, and no European 
lady with centuries d civilisation bdiind her could hate 
been more gentle or more «sympathetia They all came 
from the wild regions of Northern Albania, and I suppose 
the men of the families they had renounced are still savages 
in all essentials. And yet it was always witti an effort &at 
one realised that these women, who spoke a cultivated 
French and thought in terms of Western Christianity, were 
the sisters and daughters of Gheg clansmen. Their 
religion was to them a daily comfort and an exalted 
stimuhis, and one felt in their presence that if the Catholic 
Church can extend its work of education, evcu Uie most 
benighted region of Albania may have a lutui e. 

I II.— Language and History. 

Of the origin and history of the Albanians it is ditticult 
to write much that has meaning with any certainty. One 
fact only is fairly well established — that they are not new- 
comers. The Greeks, anxious to identify them with a race 
akin to the Hellenes, declare with conviction that they are 
the descendants of the Pelasgi of antiquity. But who were 
the Pelasgi ? They must have been knowm to the Romans 
under the generic name of Illyrians, a race as intractable 
and as impervious to civilisation as are the modern 
inhabitants of Albania. Doubtless, too, the Southern 
Albanians are to some extent the descendants of the 
Epirotes who followed Pyrrhus. It matters little whether 
we identify them with the Pelasgi, the Epirotes, the Mace- 
donians, or the Illyrians. They are, at all events, a race 
which never possessed a civilisation of its own, never com- 
pletely assimilated the culture of its neighbours, and always 
led, in spite of Greek schools or Roman roads, the same 
wild tribal life in the same inaccessible mountains. Ethno- 
logically it belongs to the Indo-European group, and pro- 
bably it migrated to its present fastnesses before the Italian 



Digitized by Google 



THE ALBANIANS 



239 



and the Heiienic branches, which are its nearest kinsmen. 
The Albanian language, despite marked dialectical varia- 
tions, is essentially the same wherever it is spoken — as far 
north the Montenegrin border or as far south as the Gulf 
ot Arta. It is unquestionably an Aryan language, suthciently 
distinct both from Slav and from Greek, and superficially 
at least more nearly akin to Latin than to Greek. But it 
has borrowed so much from all the tongues with which 
it has been in contact that it is difficult to tell at a glance 
how many of these manifestly Aryan words it brought from 
the Aryan home, and how many it has recovered in recent 
centuries. An educated Southern Albanian employs as 
many obviously Greek words as a Hellenised Vlach, while 
a Northern Albanian exerts his predatory talents upon 
Italian and Servian. 

There are great di flPerences between the Alba nian dialecte 
of the south (To sk) and.those^pF t he nortfiT^Gfie g),. and 
oddly enough the Gheg is said to be the softer and more 
musical speech. To my ear^ I confess^ both sound equally 
harsh and unattractive. These differences are perhaps 
rather less considerable than one would expect ^en one 
remembers that neither dialect has been reduced to writing 
before the present generation, that each borrows its abstract 
terms from an alien language unknown to the otheri and 
that in this land of mountains and brigandage there is very 
little communication t>etween north and south, A patriotic 
Alt»ntan will always declare that a Gheg and Tosk under- 
stand each other without moch difiiculty. I am a little 
distrustful of this assurance, but undoubtedly as ftkt 
language tends to be standardised and cultivated it must 
also become more universally comprehensible. It is also - 
a very disputable point whether cthnolugically the Albanians 
are really a single stock. Physically there are iii:irkevd dif- - 
ferences amon^ them. The northerners are tdW, tlicie are " 
many blondes among them^ aad. they, are said to be', 
exceptionally broad-headed. They seem indeed outwardiyjj 
indistinguishable from the Montenegrins and other Servian 
highlanders. They are active and aiuscular, btit they are' * 
lightly built and narrow-shoulderecL The Ghegs wear a i i 



Digitized by Google 



230 MACEDONIA 

I I tight-fitting^ costume, which gives them an appear ance of 
; J slenderness. The national coslunie or the Tosks is the kilt 
or fustanella of white linen which has been^ adopted in the 
Greek army, liulh these costumes are characteristic and 
national— the white cloth of the Ghe^s with^jts black em- 
broideries that suggest on the hthe hmbs of the men who 
wear it something of the fearful symmetry and the bold 
marking of a tiger, no less than, the mure lamous JustancUa. 
It is possible that these diverse costumes point to some 
quite distinct origin, and the language, odd, capricious, 
and so distinct from other Aryan tonc^ncs, may, after all, 
be an amalgam formed from the aboriginal tongues of 
these diiferent stocks. But that is a remote speculation. 
It is sufficient to note that within historical times the 
Albanians have undergone a good deal of mixing that 
can be verified. The Vlachs are nowhere so numerous 
as in Jannina and along the southern spurs of the Pindus 
range. They refuse, as a rule, to intermarry with Slavs, 
but have no scruple about contracting a unioti with Al- 
banians. Greek influence has nearly always been para- 
mount in Epirus, and Jannina was the seat of a Byzantine 
principality which became independent after the capture of 
Constantinople by the Latins during the Fourth Crusade. 
At this period the population, at all events of the towns, 
must have submitted to some infusion of Hellenic blood. 
The coast of Epirus must also have come under a strong 
Hellenic influence. It is related, for example, of Parga, an 
interesting and vigorous mercantile town built over the 
Adriatic on an impregnable rock, which retained its inde- 
pendence under Venetian protection until it was surren- 
dered by England to Ali Pasha at the dose of the 
Napoleonic war, that its inhalntants wore the peculiar 
costume of the Cretans and the other Greek islanders. 
But even more powerful than the Greek was the Servian 
influence. Scutari was for a time the capital of the Servian 
Empire, and even Jannina was governed for a considerable 
period before the Turkish conquest by Servian dukea^ who 
were usually of the royal blood. Nor can this occupation 
have been purely military, for to this day perhaps the 



Digitized by Google 



THE ALBANIANS 



231 



tnajoritf of the place-names of Central and Northern 
Albania are Slavonic. The Serbs, one suspects, must 
have left a good deal more behind them than the names 
of villages. 

Albanian history may be dismissed in a paragiaph. 
These iierce tribes which rejected the civilisations of 
Greece, Rome, and Uyzaiitium with an equal impartiality, 
have achieved political unity uiily Uvice. They seem to 
have siiccuinbcd easily to the Turkish conquest. A pasha 
or two replaced tlieir Greek or Servian governors in the 
chief towns and virtually nothing was changed outside 
their walls. But for a brief period under George Castriot, 
the Scanderbeg (Alexander) of popular legend,^ they 
enioyed a degree ot glory and independence unknown 
before or since. He was the son of a chieftain of Northern 
Albania whom the Turks took as a boy rind hrought up as 
a Janissary. His military talents soon brought promotion, 
and he learned all that his masters could teach him of the 
art of war. An act of personal injustice quickened his 
memory of the Christian faith in which he had first been 
nurtured. The Turks refused to allow him to succeed to 
his father's estates, and in his indignation he recovered his 
pntriotism. About the age of forty he escaped from the 
TuTkish camp^ renounced Islam, fled to his native moun- 
tains, and raised the standard of revolt (1443). He 
annihilated the first army which was sent against his 
little mountain fastness of Kroia, and from that initial 
success to the day of his death, his ascendancy was gladly 
recognised at least by the northern branch of ttie Albanian 
people. Those who had already accepted Islam returned 
to Christianity, and lor the first time in their history the 
Albanians were one people under a native king. He lived 
in peqiietual warfare, and defeated every force that was sent 
against him, including two vast armies led in person by the 
Sultans Amurath and Mahomed. Nor did he confine him- 
self entirely to guerilla tactics. More than once he gave 
battle to the Turks on open ground and routed them with 

* Has tradition in giving this name confused him witii Alexander 
of Macedon? 



Digitized by Google 



MACEDONIA 



fabulous siaugliter. His prowess was, no doubt, the lounda- 
tion of his influence over his warlike clans, but to hold 
together a race with whom feud and faction was already a 
settled tradition he must have had high gifts of statesman- 
ship.! His gallant and successful struggles won lum a 
name far beyond the Balkans. It was doubtless a proof 
of policy that on returning to Christianity he embraced not 
the Orthodox but the Catholic faith. That compliment to the 
West won him the patronage of the Pope^ the friendship of 
Venice, the cautious aid of Ragusi, and some subetantiai 
assistance from Naples. 

On his death in 1467 he bequeathed his kingdom to his 
son, John, a minor, and named the Venetian Republic his 
protector* But the event proved that Albanian indepen- 
dence rested on no force more lasting than the genius of 
SkSuiderbeg. The Venetians performed their duties in a 
perfunctory spirit, though they lent some assistance to the 
town of Scutari during a long si^. jfohn Castriot fled in 
X477 to Naples with many thousands of his subjects, and 
thereafter the Venetians were content to maintain a lew 
seaports as trading centres. Within ten years after the 
death of 'Skander, nothing remained of this kingdom but 
an in^iring legend. The memory of this CatfaoUc renegade 
is held in equal veneration by Moslemp Orthodox and 
CathoUc Albanians ; and among the few traditions and ideals 
which make this strange race a people, despite its own 
divisions and the oppression of the Turkish yoke, there is 
none more potent than the history of this brief struggle lor 
independence. 

It was not until the time of All of Tepelen, Pasha of 

Jannina, that the Albanians again enjoyed an approach to 

national indepenriciicc. AH w is one of the most remark- 
able charactcrh m the history of the Pciiuisula. Born 
about 1740, a poor country hey, left early an orplKin, he 
repaired his fortunes by brigandage, and carved In , way to 
wealth and rank by a combination of violence and treachery. 

< It is interesting to note that two of his most trusted lieutenants 
did actually revolt against hloi and acoeptad oommandf frooi the 

Torks. 



Digitized by 



THE ALBANIANS 



a33 



Now forgnig a title to some vacant Pashalik, again waging 
open war upon neighbouring Pashas, accusing them to the 

Porte by forged evidence of treasons which he had himself 
committed, aggrandising himself and his sons by powerful 
marriages, invariably followed by the ruin of the family 
which he honoured, he i;r.idnally carved out for himself 
and Ins heirs a virUnllv independent principality, which 
embraced at its zeiuih not only the greater part of Kjui us 
and Albania, but Thessaly and the More a as well. He 
intrigued alternately with England and Napoleon. He 
employed now English and now French officers to train 
• his troops. He somcUmcs defied, but more frequently 
bribed, Constantinople. He wa^ uiore than once on the 
verge of espousing the Greek cause, and openly throwing 
of!" the Ottoman yoke. He undoubtedly taught the 
All) Lilians to despise the Turks, and partly from policy, 
pai ily from instinct, encouraged their sense of nationality. 
To divide them from the Turks he propaj^ated the Bektashi 
heresy among the Moslems. He recognised no religious 
divisions. The only one of his genernk whom he really 
trusted was an Orthodox Christian named Athanasi VaTa, 
while among his most devoted troops were the Catholic 
Mirdites. His secretaries were all of them Greeks. His 
rule was one long welter in blood and treachery, but if he 
depopulated much of the country, his main object seems to 
iiave been to suppress brigandas^^e. He tolerated no tyrant 
but himself withm his jurisdiction, and under him com- 
merce flourished and the roads were safe. His massacres 
of the so-called " Greeks " of Suli are often ascribed to 
fanaticism. In reality, he merely suppressed the Suliotcs 
as he suppressed all the other predatory tribes and brigand 
beys who defied his administration and troubled the public 
order. Most of his atrocities were in reality only incidents 
in his consistent effort to build up a strong and orderly 
government. To regard this illiterate old savage as a 
patriot would be absurd ; but without intending it, he 
certainly contributed to the solidarity and the national 
consciousness of the Albanians. His aim was to carve 
out for himself and his sons a vast estate that should 



Digitized by Google 



^34 



MACEDONIA 



survive his deaXb» He caied only for wealth and for 
power, and while he enjoyed the reality of independence 
he never dreamed of throwing off the 'Dirkish yoke. In 
the end he overstepped the tolerance of Constantinople, 
was proclaimed a rebel, and, after defying the Turks during 
a two years' siege in Jannina, was murdered with a treachery 
which was the fittest punishment for the habitual perfidy of 
his own career (1822). But whatever the historical AU 
may have been, he gave the Albanian race a second hero 
and a legendary leader. His rule must have been router 
and harsher because more efficient than that of the Turks, 
but it was at least the rule of an Arnaut over Arnauts.* To 
the descendants of ihc men who groaned beneath it, his 
cruelty and his courage seem only picturesque. The songs 
that describe his conquests and his massacres hnvc become 
a national cyclus. The Christian Ghe^ Caslnut n 1 the 
Moslem Tosk Ali are more than tribal pei^ouahues. 
They are Albanian heroes, and their exploits are sung in 
every dialect. Ali may have been a Turkish Pasha, but his 
end was a great blaze of revolt, and the siege of Janaina has 
taken rank with Skander's struggles for liberty. The 
tradition of Ali's fuial defiance lived after him, and at 
least three more or less futile attempts at revolt have been 
made since liis day. The third of these was due to an 
organisation called the Albaiuan League, founded in 1880, 
at first with the connivance of the Turks, who used it 
against the Mont^ [^.( grins in order to avoid surrendering 
the territory assigned to them by the Berlin treaty. But 
it developed a Nationalist proi/ramme, and demanded 
autonomy. Its head, Prink (prmceps ?) Doda, the chief of 
the Catholic Mirdites, a powerful, semi-independent clan of 
the North, was driven mto exile, and since the collapse of 
this ori^'nnisation ativ Albanian who wishes to talk of 
autonomy &nd& it sa^er to seek his audience in Bucharest 
or Paris. 

' « AHMmia** is a woni known only to the Western languages, or in 
tlie form 'Afifit»lrK to Greek. The Alfanniant call fhemsoves Ani«its» 
or Skipetars. 



Digitized by Google ^ 



THE ALBANIANS 



^35 



S III.F-<:U8TOM8 AND FEUDALISM. 

Two-thiids of the Allxinians have embraced Islam. 
Everywhere throuL^hout Turkey they are to be found fillincf 
high of 1 ICC in the civii and military services. The present 
Grand Vizier is an Albanian. The Sultan's palace guard 
consists of Albanians. At court, in the general staff, and in 
every konak of the provinces they are to be found. At 
home they are bribed with decorations, or permitted to sate 
their appetite for power and wealth by holding ranks in the 
police and the gendarmerie. The wealthier beys farm the 
taxes, and to that extent have an interest in the continuance 
of comiption. And yet they remain a race apart from the 
Turks and profoundly hostile to them. There is no com* 
munity of blood between them, and even in their mosques 
the barrier between East and West divides them. For the 
Albanian is essentially a European — a European of the 
Middle Ages. Alone of all races in Turkey, he has an 
hereditary aristocracy and a feudal system. Islam, among 
Eastern peoples, is everywhere a leveller. It obliterates birth 
and race. A labourer may rise to be a Pasha^ and it is no 
rare sight to see a negro in officer's uniform commanding 
white troops. But the Albanians have kept their pride of 
birth. The Ghegs are organised in clans, which obey none 
but their hereditary chiefs. Even among the much more 
civilised Tosks of the South, wealth and rank count for 
little, and the poorest and youngest bey of an old family 
will claim precedence in public over the most venerable 
nouveau riche* The marriage customs of the Turks make 
no account of social distinctions. A Turk will marry some 
Georgian or Circassian slave. The Albanians who became 
Moslems have remained strict monogamists.' They never 
marry outside their own race and their own rank. A 
marriage with a wealthy Greek woman or an Albanian girl 
of new family is held to be a misalliance^ The mixing of 

* The only exception is diat a childle^ wife will sometimes intro* 
ducc a concubine for the purpose of perpetuating the race. But 
it is aiwavs onderstood that she herselt must choose this second 
wife. 



Digitized by Google 



236 MACEDONIA 

blood which has resulted m tlie \ u tual extinction of the old 
Turkish stock ;n Stamboul is utterly unknown in Albania, 
and the primitive structure of society has remauieLl un- 
modified by the conquest. In some sort, too, the Alti uiians 
have preserved the European attitude toward:, woiiicii. In 
certain districts the woman receives as the hostess, and 
even goes unveiled to market. No Albanian will fire at a 
woman, and even a man who tiavels with a woman is safe 
from attack. On the other hand, it must be coiilcsscd 
that tlie peasant women are little more than beasts of 
burden. The man's business is with the rifle, the woman 
does the work, and this doubtless explains why in Albania 
it is the man who must purchase the wife and not the wife 
who must find a dowry. But above all, it is in his concep- 
tion of courage and his sense of adventure that liie Albanian 
differs from the Turk. The Turk of to-day makes a good 
soldier, but that does not imply that he is really warlike. 
He is a man who can stand in ranks and obey commands. 
He will follow his officers with unquestioning obedience^ 
make light of hardship, and fight with superb obstinacy on 
the defensive. But he has not the Albanian passion for 
movement and danger. He does not live to win praises for 
his courage as the Albanian does. He is stupid and 
unimaginative^ and his courage is deficient in dash and 
aggressiveness, Aihaniaw^ on the otlier hand, is__a 

bqrn_fighter^ w^io caygfi fnr nn ntU^ f^jji^n^i^n It is 
true that he reverences birth, and has for authority all 
the respect of patriarchal times. Before the head of a 
family the younger members seem speechless and will4e8Sy 
and a man's younger brothers will l»rdly dare to smoke tn 
his presence unbidden. But far more _pnw<>rfiil than this 
reverence for birth is the respect accorded to courage. 

young men of a dan or village form themselves int o par ties, 
which sustain the rival, claims of l ocad h eroes. Esusqr 
spirited boy goes abroad la ^rei% nf aHiwnfnr^^ and one 
hardly knows whether to compare them to the knight-errants 
of the Middle Ages or to the head-hunters of tfab Malay 
jPtanlnsula. Before he reaches the age of sixteen every lad 



Digitized by Googl 



THE ALBANIANS 



237 



18 expected, in the more primitive districts^jto obtawn a 
complete set of arms l^y open robbery, and it is held to be 
more honourable to capture them iar aiicid, beyond th e | 
confines of Alhama, 

In many tribt^ marnagc by capture is still the only 
recognised institution. The Mirclitcs, for example, nominal 
Catholics, still obUiii their wives by raiding the neighbour- 
ing Moslem clans. T he modern Alb anian has the same 
sentiment about his r ifle that the mediaeval knight had 
about his sword. It is scarcely decent to go abroad 
without it. Even in Biglishta, on the confines of settled 
country inhabited by Slavs, i have seen the Albanians 
carrying their arm^ m the market-place and passed them 
plouE^hing in the fields with then nflcs slung over their 
sliouideis. Life is everywhere cheap in the Balkans, but 
west of the Pindus it loses even the poor value that 
belongs to it in Macedonia. Murder is reprobated only 
where it may le ad to a n inconvenien t vendetta. To kill 
a stranger is barely an olience against prudence, and 
certainly no moral code forbids it. Tn some districts the 
loss of a kinsman is regarded as lightly as the murder of 
a stranger, and in one i^roiip of villages at !east, etiquette 
forbids lamentation over the death of a fi^hliug-man. His 
mother or his wife receives the friend who comes to offer her 
sympathy, with Spartan recitals of the dead man's deeds and 
w wh eulogies upon his courage, instead of the conventional 
wailing which is customary in most regions of the Balkan 
Peninsula. A life that is so full of accident and of perils 
foced with defiant joy inevitably breeds a certain stoicism. 

There has grown out of this perpetual state of^ar an 
institution more curious and characteristic than the anarchy 
which it tempers — the Albanian code oLJutDOur. In the 
absence of religious restraints or of Governmental inter- 
ferenoe it is obvious that this perpetual riot of violence 
must very soon have rendered life intolerable, if indeed 
it had not ended in the eactermination of the Albanians 
themselves. To check these consequences a_ system of 
unwritten custom has gown up among the tribes, which 
limits and prescribiss the ri^t to IuHT Ulie Middle Ages 



Digitized by Google 



MACEDONIA 



in Europe invented the Tretfa DH, which lorbade murder 
during four da3r8 o£ the vntk. The Albanian plan is more 
usually to ohsenrt a dose time during the greater part of 
the hours of dayli^t. Two dans whidi are in feud will 
agree to lay the rifle aside until within an hour or half an 
hour of sunset This enables them to get through the 
ordinary business of the day in peace. The catUe are 
driven in a little earlier than usual, and the damage wfaidi 
can be done between the end of the dose time and the foil 
of night is thus moderated and restricted to what is though t 
to be a reasonable limit Usage invests sudi truces as this 
with an extraordinary sanctity. Equally sacred is the right 
of asylum, and a murderer who takes refuge even with a 
kinsman of the man he has slain, is safe beneath the roof 
which has sheltered him. This idea of truce, or the oath 
which sanctifies it, is known as the bessa, a word which 
gradually comes to cover any~ relafTbnship of fealty 
or trust. No idea plays so large ii part in the life oi aa 
Albanian, and it seems to h-.wc developed liUo some- 
thing that deserves the nainu of a sense of honour. 
And if in geueial this wild life of brigandage and vendetta 
has created a state of society of which homo ho mini lupus 
would be the aptest description, it also leads to ties of 
friendship which introduce a structure of loyalty into the 
general chaos. The clan is as homogeneous and devoted 
as it was in the Highlands of Scotland. Kinship is jealously 
reckoned and highly valued. An Albanian of good family, 
for example, will oifera traveller, \s lio is his friend, introduc- 
tions to a legion of relatives scattered from north to south, 
few of whom he has ever seen, but all of whom he assumes 
to be ready to serve him when the occasion offers. There 
is too an institution of blood-brotherhood, which is also 
found among some of the Slavs of Macedonia. Friends 
who have taken the oaths and performed the simple rites 
of this bond are brothers and allies for life, and are even 
held to be so closely connected that they must not inter* 
marry in each others' families. Thesejg^rimitiv e tra its belong 
to a level of social development litt le higher than that of the 
Pathans and Afghans^ ' 



Digitized by Googl 



THE ALBANIANS 



There is a picturesque side to this life o£ laptne and 
bloodshed. If Albania had been better known at the time 
of the Romantic reaction it would have become a place 
of pilgrimage and the fountain of much inspiration. It 
is all neither better nor worse than the wilder parts of 
Europe in the Middle Ages. The country of the MirditeSi 
who have preserved not only the feudal system but the 
Catholic religion, must offer a very fair replica of the condition 
of the Scottish Highlands, for example, at any period before 
the Reformation. The system at least breeds men, creatures 
of superb physique, who lead vivid lives, and mitigate their 
savagery by a courage and a chivalry which extort an 
admiration that may easily run into an extreme. They 
are Nietzsche's over-men, these primitive Albanians — some- 
thing between kings and tigers. Their present way of life 
dooms them to a degree of poverty which is a perpetual 
spur to oppression. Com merce is impossible^, and labour 
is held in sinall Jmnour, and the inevitable consequence 
is that sheer hunger drives the no rthern clans year by year 
over their ^JbordfiiS-to prey.Jin their laborious .Slavonic 
neighbours. Some tribes go abroad to work — the Liaps, 
for example, frequent Constantinople. Others, especially 
during the past two centuries, have gradually sprerid them- 
selves over the fertile plains beyorul tlicir original mountain 
haunts, becoming semi-civilised m the process. Scattered 
Albanian villages are to be found all over the vilayet of 
Monastir, and some of these settlements date from no more 
than forty years ago. But neither the annual migrations 
of labourers nor the permanent settlement of agricultural 
colonies has done much to modify the habits of the more 
warlike tribes — e.^.. the clansmen of Dibra, who are the 
scourjge of the Bulgarian s, mudi as the Kurds are the 
barrow 'of Armenia.. 

S IV. — Religion. 

The parallel between Kurds and Albanians is indeed so 
olmous that it has led to a general impression that the 
Albanians are a race of fanatical savages, who exterminate 



Digitized by Google 



340 MACEDONIA 

and harry their Christian ncii^h hours in obedience to re- 
ligious hatred. It would hardly be true to say this even 
of the Kurds. Most of then: ;ire very lax Mohamedans, 
like all the races of Indo-European stock who hnve 
embraced Islam, and many are absolutely heretical. Bat 
certainly they have become the tools of a movement of 
fanaticism, and done their utmost to deserve the name 
of zealots. But the truth about the Albanians is that 
throughout their history they have resisted every alien 
culture, Islam among the rest Two-thirds of them are 
Moslems, while the Christians are Orthodox in the South 
and Catholic in the North. But the Mohamedanism of the 
renegades is as nominal as the Christianity of the faithful 
remnanL It would be fairer to reproach the Moslems with 
indifference than with fanaticism* The ease with which 
they allowed themselves to be converted suggests thai their 
original Christianity must have sat very lightly upon tibem. 
It came to them in a Greek dress. Their priests were 
ignorant and illiterate, and, unlike the Slavs, they had no 
Church bound Up with their sense of nationality. No Saint 
Cyril had ever come among them to bring them letters and 
a gospel in their own tongue. The man who exchanged a 
Greek revelation lor an Arabic Koran remained no less an 
Amaut and a Skip6tar 4han belore, and he probably under- 
stood about as much of the new book as of the old. On 
the whole^ that must be the main reason why the Albanians 
succumbeid to Isbm so much more readily than the SJavs 
or the Greeks. They lost neither their nationality nor their 
civilisation in the process. For certainly tiiey had less excuse 
and less temptation. A Slav village on the plain often suc- 
cumbed to overwhehning force when it renounced its Chris- 
tianity. But an Albanian clan^ weU armed^ and free of its 
mountain, became Moslem not so much from fear as firom the 
hope of gain. In the North, where Turkish rule is only a 
name* and even the Christians bear arms^ conversion seems a 
gratuitous act of infidelity. In the South, perhaps, where 
Turkish authority is more real and where at the present day 
the possession of arms is rarely permitted even to an 
Albanian Cluistian, unfaithfulness is much more explicable. 



Digitized by Google 



THE ALBANIANS 



241 



Among the Tosks in recent times villages have often 

become Mohamedan to avoid being made into tchifliks 

(estates) for Moslem beys. Sheer oppression, exercised 
apparently i^v tlic <;cndu.rinci ic, explained the conversion 
to Islam some eight years ago of the large village of 
Godalesh, near Elbasan. Hut in c:;;L'nL'ral the motive of 
convcrsiun was either the hope oi gam oi the fear of loss. 

The structure of Aibaiiian society tloubtless had the 
result of multiplying one hundredfold the effects of 
individLial conversions among the Albainan chieftains. 
The advantages of becoming a Mohamedan were so 
obvious, and the risk of remaining a Christian so great, 
that throughout European Turkey the upper classes of the 
native gentry had really no alternative between conversion 
and flight. A landowner who wished to retain his lands 
could hardly hesitate. If he became a pervert he might 
hope to increase his estates at the expense of his faithful 
neighbours, and perhaps to obtiiin some official rank as 
well. If he remained a Christian he had sooner or later to 
leave the country. The Servian aristocracy, for example, 
either took refuse in Montenegro or accepted Islam. But 
the Slav peasants, much less bound to tlieir clncts than the 
Albanians, and grouped with more independence in village 
communities which owned their own lands, were not com- 
mitted to the fate ot die gentry. On pain of accepting a 
Moslem bey and submittmg to unnumbered exactions, they 
were usually able to retain their faith. With the Albanians, 
on the other iiand, the feudal tie was stronger, and if the 
hope of worldly advantage tempted an aristocrat to become 
a pervert, the chances were that his people followed his 
example. He was not merely their landlord. He was their 
chief, and, however reluctantly, his retainers yielded him 
(jbedience.i This explanation is, I confess, no more than a 
guess, but it seems the more plausible if we compare the 
case of the Vlachs with that of the Slavs and the Albanians. 
A vast majorify oi the Slavs remained Cbristtans. The 

' The best ekmcnis of the Albaniiin people doubtless loUowcd John 
Castriot when be emigrated to the kingdom ci Naples. The AlbaaJans 
ol Sidly stm letain the Eastern rite. 

S 



Digitized by Google 



MACEDONIA 



majority of the Albanians braune Moslem. But it is said 
that no single case has ever occurred of the conversion of a 
Vlach village to Islam. Now, tiie Vlachs form the only race 
in flie Balkans which is absolutely free in its social strocture. 
It has no aristocracy as the Albanians have. And since it is 
nomadic and pastoral rather than agricultural, it is not at 
the mercy of landowners, as are so many of the Slavs. 
Every Vlach community is practiLMlly autonomous, and 
tilt l1 Vlacli separates himseli without hesitation 

iiuui hib Village. When circumstances become too cliihcult 
they simply emigrate — as the people of Moschojoli-. did. 
The Slavs, once settled round a church and a munastery, 
remain rooted to the soil. The Albanians follow the 
fortunes of their chiefs. But the Vlachs are at home 
wherever there is a mountain-top. 

Thi- L inversion of the Alb inians to Islam has been of 
enorinoiis consequence politically, but its etlects on their 
habits ot thought and even on their social lite have been of 
the slightest. The adoption of the harem system has been 
partial and perfunctory. They are nearly all lieretics, and 
they pay scant regard to the prohibition ul alcohol. They 
have never forgotten that their ancestors were Christians. 
Some villages have made a compromise with both worlds. 
Above ground they have their mosque for all the world to 
see, while they still keep their candles burning before their 
eikons in a subterranean chapel. Elsewhere it is usual to 
provide for the uncertain chances of the I^t Day by 
baptizing children as well as circumcising theuL Every lad 
bears a Moslem name, which appears in the official raster 
of the village, while at home he is known as John or George. 
The Virgin is a name to swear by even in districts which 
became Moslem very shortly after the Conquest. So little 
fanaticism is there^ that Moslem Albanians will often fre- 
quent a Christian church, light a candle to the eikons, and, 
in short, do everything but cross themselves. The women, 
as is usual in the Balkans, are the conservative force. At 
Godaleshj for example^ &ey still observe Saints' daya^ and 
doubtless they instil into &eir children an unqualified 
reverence for the older faith, leaving it to &e men to 



Digitized by Google 



THE ALBANIANS 



443 



explain the temporal advantages that spring from con- 
formity to the religion of the Turks. This vacillation is 
probably commoner in the villages than it is in the towns, 
but even in Prizrend there is a class which habitually 
fluctuates between Islam ind Christianity^ In the same 
family it often happens tiiat the father is, for official pur- 
poses, a Catholic while the sons are Moslems. But if 
anywhere tliere is a trace of fanaticism among the Albanians 
it is in the towns, and especially in those where the local 
Christians are not Albaoians. In Ochrida and Monastir, 
for example, where there is a Turkish leaven among the 
Moslem Albanian population, and the Christians are all 
either Vlachs or Bulgarians, the racial antipathy of Slav 
and Albanian does, I think, acquire more than a tinge of 
religious hatred, and a massacre is always a possibility* 
But in these towns there are Turkish priests at work, whose 
business it is to educate the Albanians into fanaticism. In 
the country the priests are few and, for the most part, quite 
illiterate, and as often as not the mosques are allowed to 
crumble into decay. 

But there is a religious influence at work among the 
Moslem Albanians more salutary than their natural in- 
difPerentism, and more potent than their vague traditions 
of a Christian past. Islam is never a satisfying creed to a 
people of European race, and within it there have grown up 
a variety of sects which expand and refine its teaching and 
introduce into its harsh and positive doctrine an element of 
mysticism. In Albania, as in Crete, the most important of 
these sects is that of the Bektashis. They are a monastic 
order whose priests are known as dervishes. Unlike the 
regular Mohamedan clergy, they are often celibates, devoted 
to a religious life. It is a little difficult to define their 
relation to orthodox Mohamedanism. They are certainly 
heretical, but there has been no outward schism. They 
exist witiiin the Church as a pious brotherhood vowed 
to charity and goo^ works, which never adopts a formal 

• Up till 1703 most of the Ghej^s were secret Christians who received 
the sacrament by stealth, in that year a Catholic council forbade this 
practice, 



Digitized by Google 



244 MAC£IX)NiA 

antagonism to the State religion. But none the less a 
profound distrust and hostility divides the dervishes from 
the orthodox Mohamedan clergy, and their order is, or 
was, prohibited in Constantinople, no doubt because of its 
Janissary associations. Their milucnce is, however, much 
wkIlt than tlic clerical rarik^s of their order. Grouped 
around every monastery with its sheikh (abbot) and its 
dervishes are thousands ol lay brethren, who are initialed in 
its rites and its doctruies and devoted to its interests. It is 
not perhaps too much to snv that nearly every Albanian — 
at all events in the South — who has any interest in religion 
at all, is a member of the BekUsln sect. Its general 
acceptance seems to date from Ali Pasha, who sought by 
propagating a heresy among his Moslem subjects to divide 
them the more effectually from the Turks. It is dniicult to 
avoid the u-o of the word heresy — and undoubtedly the 
teaching of the Bekt;isliii is profoundly heretical — but their 
place in Islam is perhaps most nuarly analogous to that of 
Freemasonry in Chnstraniiy at a tmie when it was a real 
religious influence — as Tolstoy, for example, describes it 
in *' War and Peace." ' It imposes on its votaries duties 
of charity and benevolence, it rallies them round its 
monasteries, it chives them a more interesting and specula- 
tive creed than orthodox Islam, and it links them together 
by an obligation of mutual helpfulness. 

The Bektashi doctrine is a secret cHsciplme which is only 
fully revealed to the initiated, but i have been able to glean 
something of its teaching Irom Bektashis whom i have met 
in Crete and in Albania. 

The sect owes its origin to a certain Hadji (Saint) 
Bektash, a holy-man who became the chaplain and in a 
sense the spiritual patron of the Janissaries, and Bektashism 
was largely propagated through their influence,' One can 
understand that these youths^ sprung from European raoesy 

' The Bektashis themselves like to imagine that the Freemams are 

kindred spirits. 

" The distinguishing dress of the Janissaries, who were really an 
order of military uiunks, wai* a lali white felt cap. This the Bektashi 
shiekhs (abbots) retain. The little w hite felt cap which is the ordinafj 
Alhanian headdret* may owe its origin to this badge. 



Digitized by Google 



THE ALBANIANS 



and snatched from Christian mothers at an age when they 
must already have learned a little about Christianity, would 
prefer a liberal and heretical form of Islam. And Bek- 
tashism has imbibed clLincnts from all the faiths of the East, 
while preserving a certain spirit of its own. Its theology is 
pantheistic, It replaces the Allali of Islam, who stands to 
his votaries in the relation of an omnipotent tynmt to his 
slaves, by some conception of a universal spiritual sub- 
stance into which the human soul may merge and enter. 
It hates all barriers which divide souls from one another 
and from God. It finds the way to union with God in a 
universal love, a general tolerance. It cares nothing for 
race or creed, and I have heard a Beictashi say that a man 
might be a Christian and also a member of the order, 
though in practice he could not tell me of any Christian 
who had ever made use of the open door; but then the 
Eastern Christian values tolerance chiefly as a quality useful 
in Turks. On its mystical side Bektashism teaches that the 
saint should endeavour even in this life to overcome the 
barriers of individuality and merge himself in ecstasy with 
God. In practice I am afraid this is held to excuse a liberal 
use of opium and alcohol, and the Albanians attempt to 
realise Hegel's phra9e about the God-intoxicated philosopher 
somewhat too literally. This teaching about a common 
spiritual substance is somehow reconciled with a belief in 
the transmigration of souls. The human soul presumably 
wanders through animal txkltes before it attains union with 
the Divine. Here the suggestion of Buddhist influence 
seems irresistible. For Bektashism draws the happy infer- 
ence that no life should be wantonly taken. A really devout 
Bektashi of the old school wears bells upon his shoes, that he 
may warn Qie little creatures of the grass to avoid his footsteps. 
One might search all the records of Eastern Christianity 
in vain for a refinement of faith so pleasing and gentle as 
this. As for its relation to Islam, 1 believe that Bektashism 
is not only heretical, but actually rebellious. In secret it 
denies that Mahomet was a prophet of unique or authorita- 
tive rank. I have even been assured by an educated 
Albanian, who, though not himself a Bektashi, was born 



Digitized by Google 



246 MACEDONIA 

of Bektashi parents, and bred in a devout Bektashi 
household, that the sect preaches an active contempt for 
Mahomet. But obviously, if this be so, it is a secret which 
it would be dangerous for an initiated Bektashi to divulge. 
Historically Bektashism ranges itself with all the other 
Moslem heresies, notably with that of the Shiahs of Persia 
and India, who hold the Caliph Ali and his murdered 
children Hassan ^md Hussein * in especial reverence. Ali 
they place above Maliomet ; 1 Ikivc been told that they 
believe in a Trinity, of which Ah is a member, but this 
seems hardly consistent with I \in theism, thoui^h the word 
may li;ive pleased the Janissary lads vviiu had once been 
Chri.^iicins. 

On the moral side, it has been said that the Bekla^his are 
antinouiian> who teach that no moral precepts are binding 
on the elect. I feel convinced that this is a misunderstand- 
ing, or perhaps a calumny invented by the Turks. Indeed, 
the Turks profess to think that they are Atheists. The ethics 
of the Bektashis is rather a spiritual creed which attempts 
to supersede an external morality of precepts and com- 
mandments by substituting^ for them some more universal 
principle of love and charity. It is possible tliat they sweep 
aside the Mohamedan version of the Decalogue, just as 
they disre^^ard the prohibition of wine and of portraiture. 
As Pantheists they arc naturally intolerant of all formalism. 
Moreover, it is one of their axioms that a man should follow 
the inward light, indifferent to public opinion. But their 
teaching on morals was defined to a friend of mme by the 
sheikh (abbot) of their teku (monastery) near Calcandelen 
in the following quaint but admirable summary. " AH 
evil," said the sheilch, consists in the use of these four 
phrases : — 

"'1 eat ; you are hungry.' 

" ' 1 am good ; you are evil.' " 

* They believe that the soul of Hussein's murderer has gone into a 
hare, and for that reason no Albanian will touch or eat hares, though 
they do not object to shooting them. The sacrednesb ot the hare i:> a 
very widespread superstition— found, cg», in Siberia. Perhaps ^is 
legend really rests on some older belief. 



Digitized by Google 



THE ALBANIANS 



H7 



And oertainly from that text' om miglit construct an 
excellent qrstem of mofality. It would hardly serve as a 
pillar for the sacred institution of private property, and it 
would make a swift end of a dogmatic State religion. But 
for a creed of charity, brotherhood, and tolerance it would 
make an excellent foundation* I can fancy that Tolstoy 
and this Bektashi sheikh would find mudi in common. A 
teaching so spiritual and so htunane is doubtless somewhat 
above ttie nioral level of the Albanians. But at least it 
keeps tiieir minds open to better influences, and saves them 
from becoming like the Kurds — the tools of a fanatical 
Sultan. Of all its tenets at least they have learned toler- 
ance. It has never been my good fortune to see Bektashism 
at work under happy political conditions. The Bektashi 
community in Crete wli c forced to t ike sicks in the general 
feud between Cliiistian and Moslem. But tliey deplored it 
while ihev joined in it, as men who approve of better things 
while cotistranit liuiiaes Ihcm into worse. Amid the angry 
lite nt that unhappy island they had contrived to lay the 
foundations of a quiet and pro^essive existence. They 
had their little library of French and Turkiali books ; they 
loved in a spirit of broad toleration to debate theology with 
strangers, with Christians, and among themselves ; and 
their Bektasins.m seemed to save them from the arid nega- 
tions of the average " Young Turk," who is too often a 
freethinker only because his mind is too indolent or too 
crude to care for speculative things. But to me the type of 
the good Bekta^lH is the sheikh of the Tekc in Prizrend, 
Gentle, dignified, and courteous, he spends an innocent 
old age in a retired garden of red ro-es and old-faslimned 
stocks. To Visit him was to step into an atmosphere of 
simplicity 'nid peace. An active life lay behind him. He 
had spent long years wandering over the Moslem world. 
He had sojourned in India and studied in Bokhara, listen- 
ing wherever some noted doctor had a thought to give or 
an influence to bestow. At the end of his pilgrimage, laden 
with the wisdom of the East, he even made his way to 

' I.e., it is evil to be full whoi other men are empty. It is evil to 
IXMSt one's own rigbteoomn and to d«ay the good in otbors. 



Digitized by Google 



MACEDONIA 



Rome, anxious to prove hn tolennoe tsy paying his r e ap e c ts 
to the Pope. He waited some montlis for ao andioioe, and 

came away grieved at the rebuff with which his ^mple 

impulse of charity had been met. When his tale was 

finished he turned to us witli .iii earnest look in his thought- 
ful eyes, and tried Ihiough the unsvmpiithetic medium of 
our Greek interpreter to convey hii» kindly mysticism to us. 
Something we caught about the coininunity of souls, before 
the time came for us to leave him latlcn with his roses 
that seemed to carry with them the rarer fragrance of his 
gentleness and piety. 

§ V.-^KOBmA AND THB LANGUAGE MOVSMBNT. 

Albania is nut all a wilderness. There arc plains^in its 
southern cuniines which have attained a fairly hig ii level o f 
civilisation, where the anarchj^i^L only relative, and the 
Albanians themselves are ripe for settled government and 
clanioious for education. The Tosks^of the SQUlikiiakve 
' always been :i milder stock than the northern Gheg_s. They 
; ar e more sev erely dis cipli ned by the Turkish administration . 
They pay taxes and submit to military conscription. They 
indulge with le>=^ unpunitj in raids and forays, in feuds and 
I civil wars. There is no Slav popul ition anionic tiiein, pre- 
destined by its unarmed helplebsness to be their sei 1*=; and 
vassals. The alien races who do live amofig them, notabiy 
the Hellenised Vlachs, aie a civilising iniiuence. They are 
within easy reach of the Greek border and Greek culture. 
The Christian minority belongs to the Orthodox Church, 
and the Greek language is spoken pretty generally among 
the upper classes, whether Christian or Moslem, in such 
towns as Jannina and Koritza, and even by the peasants in 
the r^ions near the frontier. Albanian is still the mother- 
tongue. The beys are still feudal princelings. The primitive 
Albanian customs are still unmodified. But the world 
beyond the mountains is a reality and an influence, as it 
is not when one crosses the Scumbi at £lbasan, whm the 
wild Gheg country begins. 
There is an air almost Buropean about the town ol 



Digitized by Google 



THE ALBANIANS 249 



Koritza. The approach to it is along a firm road which 
is quite convinced that it is not a water-course or an 

exhausted torrent-bed. Your horse, bred on Turkish high- 
ways, at Icni^th conseiUs to crorss the bridges without 
a protest, and on bomc of them you may even remark a 
parapet. The peasants whom you pass are drcc^sLci, it is 
true, in the garb which their ancestors m;iy Itave worn when 
they followed Pvrrhus into Italy, and all ol them carry arms ; 
but they postpone their staring until you iiave passed them, 
and, insensibly, you feel that you are in a land of free men, 
where self-respect is almost possible. Whi le the castles of 
the chiefs in the country of the Ghegs still rese mble b order- 
keeps, hercj beside the primitive square-built towers of their 
ancestors^ the modiyrii. To$k beys have raised enormous 
chaieau^x which dwarf and overawe the mud hovels of their 
poor retainers. You note a coal mine, recently worked, in 
the outskuts of the town, and two mill chimneys — innocent 
of smoke — quarrel with a tasteless but magnificent new 
cathedral and a dazzlinj^ mosque for the possession of the 
skyline. The streets are relatively clean, and in the shops 
of this strange city, remote alike from sea coast and from 
railway, you meet again all those rehnenients and super- 
fluities whose very existence yon had forgotten in the 
Macedonian wilderness. The energy and virility of the 
Albanian character seem somehow to have found a half- 
expression. Yet a Greek Bishop and a Turkish Pasha, 
aliens both of them, still claim the allegiance of the town, 
though confronted by a spirit of the soil which both dread 
and both persecute — a spirit that is busily knitting a new 
people together, in spite of all their efforts. 

If the secret thought in the august hearts of these two 
officials could be bared to the world, it would deserve to rank 
among the rarest curiosities of officialdom. They have one 
master passion, the Bishop and the Pasha, and when they 
have finished praying for each other's destruction in their 
daily secret devotions, I suspect that a fervent little clauae 
in Greek and in Turkish is addressed in much the aanie 
phraseology to Allah and the Trinity. And that is a prayer 
ior the destnictioa of a spelling-book. They look upon that 



Digitized by Google 



250 



MACEDONIA 



spelling-book much as Zeus regarded the torches of Pro- 
metheus. The end of the Turkish Empire is somehow 
predestined in the cabalistic symbols of its alphabet, and 
its little reading lemons in wonis of one syllable are like to 
be more fatal to the Greek Chnrch than all the tractates of 
the heretics. I saw it onoe^ and turned its pstgjes with timid 
care^ as one might handle a torpedo. It was lodced in a 
glass case in the sacred precincts ol the American Protestant 
School of Koritza, where it sheltered safely on foreign soil 
under the shadow of treaties and capitulations. I had just 
been paying a formal call on the Bishop, who had ex- 
plained to me how, ever since he had been Secretary to the 
CEcumenical Patriarch, his hard-won leisure had been spent 
in ceaseless efforts to promote a union between the Andean 
and the Greek Church. In business hours he had sterner 
work. He occupied himself in excommunicating the parents 
of all the children who dared to attend the Protestant school 
where that spelling-book is harboured. It seemed an odd 
way of promoting the union of Protestantism and Ortho- 
doxy. As for the Pasha, he had lately sent the chief of 
police to hunt for seditious book^, :inci otJy a {Kicmptory 
telegram from one of the consulates la Monabtir had availed 
to save the alphabet. 

The history of that spelling-book is the record of the one 
hopeful movement which skives a promise of enlighteniiient 
to the Albania of the future. There is no trace until the 
middle of the seventeenth century of any Albanian who was 
so eccentric as to wish to write his own language. Those 
old Skipetars, leading their strenuous life of rapine and feud, 
had nu wish to read, and no occasion to write. If the need 
arose to communicate with a distant friend there was alwaj's 
the professional Turkish letter-writer, who sits cross-legged 
at his corner in the bazaar in every Oriental town, with his 
reed and his ink-horn, and he would translate the necessary 
message into the most involved and courtly Turkish. Fail- 
ing him, there was the nearest Orthodox village priest, who 
could usually write in Greek. There were no doubt schools 
in such centres as Jannina, Berat, Koritza, and Elbasan, but 
they belonged to the Orthodox Church, and their whole 



Digitized by Google 



THE xVLBANlANS 



instnictton was in Greek. They taught the young Albanian 
that he was a Greeks that he must speak Greel^ and that his 
mother-tongue was only a nursery dialect for children, or a 
barbarous palais for ''Turks." As for the Moslems, school 
hardly entered into their notions. The Turkish conception 
of a school was a place where little boys squatted upon the 
ground, and recited the Koran by heart When they had 
by chance a desire to learn to read and write, even the 
Moslems preferred, and still prefer, to learn Greek. Greek, 
after all, is much more spoken than Turkish in Lower 
Albania; and difficult though its orthography may be, it 
hardly requires the years of apphcation which are necessary 
in order to learn Turkish caligraphy. I knew an officer 
from the Janiiina clibtrict whose fathtM- liad actually sent 
him for a year or two to a Greek Gyuuiasium. I was even 
more startled, on distributing some relief-money to the 
vilhi^^ers of a few Moslem-Albanian hamlets in the Colonia 
district, whose homes had been burned by the Bulgarians 
under Tchakalaroff, when with their great horny hands 
these giants scrawled their signatures on the receipt forms 
in Greek characters. But, after all, learning which came in 
a foreign guise could make no pi ogress in Albania. And 
here the peciilinr genius of the modern Greek langiiac^e is to 
blame. An Englishman who has had a classical education 
can understand a leading article in a Greek newspaper after 
twenty minutes' glance at a paradigm ot the modern verb, 
and yet he would make nothing of the simplest sentence in 
spoken Greek. To an Albanian peasant who can speak 
colloquial Greek easily, and scrawl his name without undue 
labour in Greek letters, the same leading article would 
convey just nothiricf at all. But indeed many Albanians 
who can write Greek are rather able to express certain 
limited and conventional ideas in Greek than to command 
the language. I have heard, for example, of a noble Mo> 
hamedan family which called in a Greek teacher when the 
dau^ter of the family was about to be married. She learned 
to formulate certain predse and very limited ideas in Greek 
— mainly information and inquuies about health — ^not with 
the intention of acquiring a key to Greek culturei but simply 



Digitized by Google 



MACEDONIA 



to send news about domestic events from her new home 
to the old. The knowledge of Greek letters was sit no time 
rare in Southern Albania, but none the less the Albanians 
remained illiterate, isolated, and untaught The few 
went to the Greek Gymnasia in Koritza or Jannina, or to the 
University of Athens became, to all purposes, Gredtt. But 
the bulk of the Albanian people had no intention of de- 
nationalising itself, and its patriotism in consequence was 
quite untainted by letters. 

It was not until the second quarter of the seventeenth 
century that any Albanian developed the odd wisb to use 
his language for literary purposes. The first pioneers seem 
to have come from among the Catiiolic clergy. Their 
record in this matter compares favourably with that of their 
Orthodox brethren, for whom the terms ''Greek' and 
^Christian seem to have been synonymous* The first 
Albanian book that was ever printed was an ^'Imitatio 
Christi," published in Venice in 1626^ A Catholic Bishop 
of Uskub, by name Bogdanes, did much for the language. 
He used the Latin alphabet, and a few copies ol his worics 
are still extant He had a more enterprising successor 
towards the end of the eighteenth century, an Orthodox 
teacher named Theodore, who lived in Elbasan. He was 
the first pioneer to attempt a serious study of Ae language, 
and his ''Lexicon Tetraglosson " (Latin, Greek, Vladi, 
Albanian) displays a real originality, since it chums for 
Albanian a place among the languages of Europe. He 
employed a curious alphabet of his own, which is neither 
Latin nor Greek. * Some patriots suppose that it was an 
ancient Albanian alphabet which never fell out of use at 
Elbasan. Others suggest that it may have been founded on 
a secret cipher which some merchants of Elbasan used for 
their private correspondence. More probably it was rt vivcd 
and, perhaps, modified by Thcudurc. TIil old men of this 
district employ it to this day. 2 It is diilicult to crush the 

' It appears to differ but slightly from the first Dorian alphabet 
based upon the Phoenician characters, and, indeed. Von Hahn b«iieves 
that it was derived directly from the Phcenicians. 

' I take these details, and, indeed, mucli else in this chapter, frora 
a manuscript euUtled " x^ti 'AX^avip," which I found one evcnii^ 



Digitized by Google 



THE ALBANIANS 



^53 



unpnioed wealth of sound in which Albanian riots, into 
leas than thirty-one or thirty-two characters. Certainly no 
ingenuity has ever succeeded in representing it in Greek. 
The ambition ol Theodore's life was to found an Albanian 
press in Elbasan* He worked and schemed and saved, and 
at length was able to give an order to the Vlach printers of 
Moschopolis for a supply of Albanian types. The order was 
duly executed, and Theodore^ full no doubt of a happy 
excitement as his patriotic dream approached its reaUssF 
tion^ must needs go in person to Mosdhopolis to escort his 
precious goods to Elbasan. His concern for their safety 
excited the suspicions of the carriers. What could there 
be in these heavy boxes so dear to Theodore's heart, 
unfess it were money? And accordingly, taking counsel 
among themselves, the muleteers murdered Theodore. 
Tradition does not relate what they did with their 
mysterious and useless spoil. Clearly Theodore was a 
pioneer born out of due time. It was a dangerous thing 
in those days to play with letters in Albania. Some 
fifty years later another Southern Albanian, Naoum 
Vekilcharyi, took up Tlieodore's task, and worked out 
another alphabet, it imidc some progress in the dis- 
tricts round Koritza, and a few little booklets were 
printed in it. iiut by this iimc the jealousies of tliL Cii LLk 
clergy were aroused, and it is generally believed aiaong 
Albanian patriots that Nauuiii, wliu was so reckless as to 
entrust himself during an illness to the Greek hospital at 
Constantinople, was poisoned by order of the Patriarch. I 
repeat the story not because I believe it, but because it is 
interesting to note that the efforts of the Albanians to throw 
off the ignorance of the centuries had already roused the 
hostility oi the Orthodox Church. As yet the movement 
was in its infancy, and could be checked by the untimely 
deaths of its leaders. Meanwhile the Catholic clergy in the 

hidden behind an ottoman hi my bedroom in Monastir. It was written 
by a patriotic Albanian Christian, an educated man with sonic literary 
talent, whose name I must for his own sake suppress. His object in 
hiding it in my room was to make tliecase of nis countl3niieii known 
in England, and perhaps I serve his pnrpow best by incorponliiig his 
maimal with my own otMervations. 



Digitized by Google 



^54 



MACEDONIA 



North were by no means idle. The Jesuits issued at number 
of bookSf mostly, however, legends of the Saints, which can 
have had no particular educative value. A rdigtous 
periodical was also published by them in Scutari. The 
h^piest event for the Albanian language was the translation 
of the Bible by Constantine Christophorides (whose intellect 
had been quickened by an intimate association with the 
scholarly traveller, Von Hahn), under the auspices of flie 
British and Foreign Bible Society. It was issued at first in 
two alphabets, more or less modified to suit the peculiar 
phonetics of the Albanian language — in Greek characters 
for the South, m Laliii for the North. These CcU ly editions, 
however, found small favour, but between the years 1877-9 
a Comiuiltce of Albanian patriots, most of them Moslems, 
sat in Constantinople and elaborated yet anutlier alphabet, 
mainly Latin, with an admixture of Greek characters. This 
was at length adopted by the Bible Society, and their 
Albanian colporteurs were set to work to sell it. They are 
to this day persecuted alike by the Greek Church and by 
the Turkij. Every journey they undertake is an adven- 
ture. Their families are boycotted and excommunicated by 
the Orthodox priesthood ; they themselves are frequently 
imprisoned by tiie furks. The work of the Constantinople 
Commission soon attracted the notice of tlic Turkish 
Government, and it had perforce to remove itseit to a free 
centre. It settled in Bucharest and established a printing 
press of its own, from which about tifty books have been 
issued, including a Grammar, a Life of Skiinderbeg, a popular 
history f)f Albania, and a number of translations. Albanian 
periodicals are issued in Bucharest, in Sofia, in Rome, and 
in London,* but comparatively few copies find their way into 
Turkey. There is a chair of Albanian in Vienna University, 
and the Austrian Consulate in Monastir from time to time 
recruits students among the more promising of the younger 
patriots. They are lured away by a promise of employment 
and education, and their fate is^ of course, to become the 

* AlbamOt published in London, is a literary monthly edited Palk 
Bey Kofiitxa, a savant and scholar, whose high attainments in philology 
are as remarkable as his tolerance and enlightenment in politics. 



Digitized by Googl 



THE ALBANIANS 



agents of Austrian intrigue. The Austrian Foreign Office 
has something more prdctical in view than the study of an 
obscuic and lu L[lectccl branch of Aryan philology. 

To keep Alh.uiia sa\;L^c and ignorant is a fundamental 
principle of Abdul Ilaiiud's statesciaft. Macedonia is 
covered with schools which disseminate the views of every 
conceivable racial propaganda. There are Oreek schools to 
HcUciuse Vlachs and Slavs and Albanians. There arc 
Bulgarian schools which maintain the schism withni the 
Orthodox Church. There are Servian schools to split tlie 
Slav element. There are Roumanian school to detach 
the Vlachs from the Hellenic interest. On all of these the 
Porte smiles with an indifferent and capricious favour. 
The more schools there are and the more propagandas, the 
less fear is there of a coalition among the Christians against 
the Turkish yoke. For all of these there is a contemptuous 
tolerance. They are part of the hereditary Ottoman tradition 
of dividing to conquer. But Albanian schools fall under a 
very different category, in them the Turks have seen a 
force making not for di^^cord, but forunitv. The Albanians, 
divided in religion, have only their language in common, 
and in the cult of that language lies the hope of the reunion 
of Moslem and Christian. The Albanian movement, 
nationalist like all the others, differed trom them in seeking 
its rallying-point not in a religious but in a secular pro- 
paganda. Though the earlier pioneers were all Christians, 
their work was never partisan, and they readily won the 
patronage and the sympathy of the Moslem aristocracy. It 
is a matter of indifference to the Turks under what national 
or religious banner the Christians may enrol themselves. 
But that Moslems and Christians should unite, that 
Moslems should discover a racial consciousness^ was quite 
intolerable, and at once marked out the Albanian movement 
for persecution. Turkish political theory does not recog- 
nise race as a legitimate line of distinction among peoples* 
It is religion which divides. A good Moslem has no 
business with history or language or aspirations. He is 
an Ottoman and a subject of the Caliph-Sultan. Christians, 
within certain limitSp may indulge in what political sym- 



Digitized by Google 



256 



MACEDONIA 



pathies they pleaae. They may even hang portraiis of a 
Greek or a Servian King in their cafSs if they choose. They 
do not bear armsy they are ineligible for any real executive 
office in the State, they are nullities who may safely be 
allowed to phj at sentimental disloyalty, provided it stop 
short of secret association or armed demonstration. But 
when Moslems take to these vagaries it is a very dififerent 
matter. It is upon their arms that the Empire rests. Their 
loyalty is necessary, and anything less than loyalty is not 
merely treason, but schism. Ths^ is doubtless why the 
" Young Turkidi" Liberal movement, tne£Fective and innocu- 
ous though it is, is persecuted more severely than any Bul- 
garian conspiracy. In the case of the Albanians there were 
additional reasons at work. They are a military people 
whose revolt would be as formidable as their loyalty is 
valuable. Their country is difficult and inaccessible^ and 
therefore it seemed wise to check the first signs of par- 
ticularism, since an armed rising would be peculiarly diffilcult 
to subdue. Further, it is from the Albanians that the Sultan 
recruits his bodyguard, and what would become of Yildis 
if its sentries were to develc^ national aspirations ? Finally, 
if the Albanians were to become milder and more 
civilised under the influence of letters, who would keep the 
Serbs and the Bulgarians in check ? They would cease to 
be the marauders and the tyrants of the marches, and the 
Slavs of these border regions might some day raise their 
heads. These were cogent reasons why the Albanian 
movement should be ruthlessly suppressed. 

All experience in the East goes to show that when a 
people begins to cultivate its lanijuage luitl U> cLiun schools 
of its own, its next wish is an cccculi iu and uncomfortable 
ucmaad for decent government. Indeed, the surprising 
thing is that Allxunan schools ever came to be established 
at all. In 1884, however, the Albanian Society, which was 
busied in publishing il^ booklets and periodicals in 
Bucharest, contrived to open a secondary school for boys 
in Koritza. It had on an average about sixty pupils, \\ ho 
came from both Moslem and Christian families, wlule 
the teachers belonged to the Orthodox rite. Its success 



Digitized by Googl 



THE ALBANIANS 



among the Cliristiansi howmr, was timited, becatiae from 
the first it was subjected to tiie systematic persecution of 
the Greek clergy. The reading of anathemas against it 
soon became a regular part of the ritual in the Greek 
cathedral. Its teachers were steadily boycotted. But even 
these methods proved ineffective, and ultimately the Greeks 
found it necessary to denounce the two principal Albanian 
teachers as traitors who were conspiring against the Sultan. 
Their efforts went unheeded for some years, since the war 
of 1897 had left the whole Greek race under a cloud. But 
in 1902 the teachers, two brothers named Naoum and 
Lcoiiidas Natcha, were arrested, and still languish untried 
in prison. The school, as I saw it, is a wreckLc] and dis- 
mantled shell, its garden ovcTL^rown with weeds, and its 
class-rooms littered with the stones wliich the apostles of 
Hellenism and culture cast through its broken windows as 
they go arrogantly by. Another interesting experiment 
still survives in a maimed form. In 1889 an Albanian 
Protestant School for girls and young boys was started 
under tlit auspices of the American Mission by Mr. Geras- 
simo Kyrias, an able and devoted man who did much in 
a short life for his language and the cause. Like so many 
of the pioneers of the movement, he came to an untimely 
end. He was captured by brigands, and dragged about by 
them tor the best part of a year, while his friends collected 
an exorbitant ransom. The exposure, the privation, and the 
wanton cruelty to which he was subjected during this 
experience practically killed iam, and he died soon after 
his release. The school is carried on by his sister, a 
graduate of Robert College. For four years it thrived and 
was much patronised by the Moslem gentry of Koritza. 
But its success in due course aroused the suspicions of the 
authorities. It would never do to allow the next generation 
of the Mohamedan aristocracy to be brought up by 
mothers who had imbibed the idea of patriotism with a 
knowledge of their own tongue. It was given out that the 
father of any Mohamedan child attending the school 
would be sent immediately, and without trial, into lifelong 
exile. Too many had gone that road before— now a 

8 



Digitized by Google 



258 



MACEDONIA 



hapless poet wiioee whole crime was to have published a 
version of the l^nd of Genevieve in the proscribed 
Albanian language^ and agun a generous and tolerant 
who had assisted the Koritsa schools. The threat proved 
effective^ and only die Christian scholars remained. With 
them the Greek cler^gy knew how to deal. There were ttie 
usual anaihemasy excommunications^ and boycottsi and in 
1904 when I visited Koritsa, Miss Kyrias found her pupils 
reduced to about twenty boarders, some of them Protestant^ 
and most of them members of families whose homes lie 
beyond the immediate influence of the Bishop of Korita. 
Her teaching is carried on as though it were a furtive and 
shameful practice, and her school, centre of high influences^ 
model of order and sweetness and goodwill, would be more 
readily tolerated if it were a nest of vice and crime. At any 
moment the chief of police may come clanking into the 
courtyard, and more than once the brave woman who 
woite there alone and unprotected has stood in her door- 
way and dared him to execute his threat of confiscating her 
books. The sdhool itself is under a foreign flag, but Miss 
Kyrias is a Turkish subject, and liable to the same treat- 
ment that was meted out to the masters of Ac boys* 
school. There are also the Catholic schools in the North, 
conducted by the Jesuits in Scutari, and one or two other 
of the larger Ghc^ CLiilrcs. The Catholic clergy has done 
much for llic Aibaniaii languagi.', bul it conducts its schools 
on a deiinitely religious basis, winch deprives them of any 
infiuence upon the Mohamedans, who form, alter ail, two- 
thi: cfs of the population. They owe their immunity to the 
fact that they are under Austrian protection. » Unhappily 
their civilising mission is confined to the towns. If ever 
the Ghegs are to be reclaimed from savagery it will be 
through neutral or secular sclioois which the sons of the 
Moslem beys can attend. The same organisation which 
founded the Albanian boys' school in Kontza, opened 

■ The Sisters of St Vincent de Paul were formerly estsU^shed in 
Prizrend, but since thisy are under Frentih protection the Austrian 
interest ititngoed aguBSt them, and they wott compelled to abandon 
their work. 



Digitized by Google 



THE ALBANIANS 



259 



schools at Pogracictz :\nd in the Colonia district, but these 
also were closed mainlv through thej lealoiisy of the Greeks. 
On the coast tfiere avc seciil.ir Itali in schools at Diirazzo 
and Vallona, which have ilso had their share of persecu- 
tion. Their aim is to propagate Italian influence and their 
success is limited. 

The fears of the Turks and the jealousies of the Greeks 
have worked their will upon the Albanian movement so far 
as any external organisation goes. They have destroyed 
the machinery of propaganda, and left it a cult of the heart 
which depends on the devotion of individuals. It has 
neither sctioob nor churches nor committees. There are 
AUxuiian societies no doubt in Roumania, in Italy, and 
Egypt, more or less active and more or less independent. 
But they have no branches in Albania. Nothing would be 
easier than to found a secret sodety on the lines of the 
BuJgarian Committee, but in fact nothing of the sort exists. 
There is not even a rudimentary of^ganisation to csny on 
the smuggling of nationalist literature, and venal and 
ineffident though the Turkish customs and police may be, 
Ihey are a harrier which suffices to eidnde the periodicals 
that preach revolt. It is in one sense a singular proof of 
political incapacity that witii sudi ample opportunities so 
HtUe has been done. Perhaps it also is due to the fact that 
in most respects the balk of flie Albanian race has already 
the freedom which it values^ The Albanians enjoy anarchy 
and they have not the same motives as the Bulgarians to 
combine for the achievement of political autonomy. For 
already they have liberty to do anything but learn. And 
yet, despite the want of organtsataon, a bloodless and 
innocent propaganda goes forirard below the surlsce, which 
is in snrprising contrast to the martial spirit of the race and 
to the traditions of the Balkans. It works neither by open 
warfare nor secret assassination^ but the cause has none the 
less its unpaid and unofficial misstonaries^ who create wher- 
ever they go a spirit ol brotherhood, which is in its own 
way more valuable than any disciplined and tyrannical 
society. Beyond the reach ol the Turkish authorities^ in 
Corfu, in Cixo, in Bucharest^ and even in Sofia, w h e re ver 



Digitized by Google 



26o 



MACEDONIA 



Albaiiians migrate in search of labour und wealth, they iind 
some countryman possessed of education and enlighten- 
m<jnt, who urges upon them the cuU of their own language, 
awakens their pride in their own nationality, and teaches 
them to luok for a future of progress and independence. 
Returning to their own moiMitaius, they bring with them the 
mysterious lore of the new alpliabet. The Albanian who 
despised letters when they came to him in a foreign guise, 
conceives n new ;ittitnde towards learning when he dif^covers 
that his mother-tongue can be written and printed. Civilisa- 
tion is no longer the alien thing which deniaiulcd of him 
some sacrifice of his nationnlity, some disloyalty to his 
past. He becomes an enthusiastic worshipper of this 
Minerva in fitstanelUif and his smuggled spelhng-book opens 
out to him a vista of culture and advancement. Even the 
Turkish prisons have become centres of enlightenment, and 
schoolmasters incarcerated for the offence of teaching boys 
find themselves enabled to influence men. I connt among 
my friends an Albanian bey who, condenmed for murder, 
entered the gaol of Salonica a savage of the old school, 
dreaming of no life but the turbulent round of vendettas 
and oppressions which his ancestors had led before him. 
He learned in his captivity to read and write Albanian, and 
to*day, if he is still uneducated and naive, his whole atti- 
tude has undergone a fresh orientation. He is regarded by 
the Christians of his district as a champion and a pro- 
tector. If he is still suspected and disliked by the Turks^ it 
is for his charity, his tolerance, and his friendship with the 
disaffected. He cares no more for the old tribal feuds and 
dreams instead of a war of liberation. And such cases are 
by no means uncommon. I cannot do better than quote the 
quaint words of my manuscript, the work of an Albanian 
who is himself engaged in the midst oC his other avocations 
in this informal and romantic propaganda. ''The only 
means which the Albanians possess for spreading the 
national idea is some well-thumbed spelling-book, which 
works many a miracle as it passes from hand to hand, 
hunted though it is by the Turks and the Greek clergy, 
who both anathematise it as a stdiuous and bLibvcr:>rvc 



Digitized by Google 



THE ALBANIANS 



261 



book. The spelling-book carries with it a magic that 
dissolves feiicls» and unites by indefinable bonds the most 
ancient adversaries^ brings peace and the w a r m es t friend- 
ship among all ranks and agics, awakens an indescribable 
enthusiasm lor the language and the race, and for every 
good work, and in short transforms the savage and inhuman 
clansman into a civilised citizen/' Again, after describing 
the deplorable feuds and jealousies which are caused among 
Albanians of good family by the everlasting struggle for 
precedence, the manuscript goes on to say 

^'But among Albanians who have been enlightened by 
learning to write their own language, nobility of birth haa 
no longer a meaning, for all of them are equal, sincere 
friends and, so to speak, blood brothers. Forgotten are 
offences and feuds, rank and caste, and whatever might 
tend to separate. You in:iy see in Albania to-day that men 
are laiii^ecl ;ind r;inked a.iid valued not according to their 
creed, their ;ii^e, or tlieir birth, but according to the depth 
ot Uicir p.itnotic feeling. To Albanian patriots, creeds and 
ranks are senseless and obsolete inventions ; in their view 
the highest nobility and the best religion is to love and 
write and cultivate their tongue and their nationality." Nor 
is this quaint and enthusiastic language exaggerated. I 
have seen an othcial in the Turkish hierarchy, a Moslem 
Albanian of good family, publicly embracing a Christian 
peasant, and the tie between them was snnply the pro- 
hibited cult of their common language. Under the joint 
persecution of the Church and the State, the cult of 
the Alb mian language has deepened and broadened into 
a patriotic movement at once nationalist and democratic. 
Because the Moslems are more in e;irnest about it than the 
Chi i^tKiiis, it has swept aside the barriers of creed ; and 
because the Christians who did the work of pioneers are 
men ot the people, it has broken down the prejudices of 
caste. To the indifferent foreigner it may seem a trivial 
matter that an unlettered race should discover their own 
language after centuries of neqlect. It lias no literature 
save the ballads of the hriguids and tlie threnodies of the 

old women who carry on the ancient trade of professional 



Digitized by Google 



262 



MACEDONIA 



mourners. It has nothing to add to the music or the 
wisdom of European speech. And yet the cult of it has, 
for the first time in their history, united a divided and 
barbarous people. Persecution has strengthened their fibre, 
and the spiritual stimulus of this preoccupation about an 
idea has enlarged their mental horizon, softened their 
mannen^ and raised them to a moral level where self- 
discipline and disinterested devotion alike become possible. 
In this cult of letters and language lies the best pledge for 
the future of Albania. Thanks to the folly of Greeks and 
Turkfl^ it is already laying the foundation of her inde- 
pendence, and, at the same time, of her civilisation. When, 
in the fulness of time, an Albanian prince takes his seat 
on the throne of Sk&nderbeg, he wUl swear his fealty to 
the enlightened constitution ol the youngest of European 
kingdoms neither on Bible nor Koran* He will take his 
oath, if he be wise, on the Albanian spelling-book. 

§ VI.— Prizrend and the Reforms. 

If Koritza is fb» far'**^ ^ """i" ^'*^'*«^ — frf fhr 
HUldficJCo^i with their qoasi-Hdlenic civilisation and 
their new and bloodless cult of letters, Prizrend is a centr e 
of the wilder Gheg race ; and when I visited it in Tune, 

1903^ it •a^r>^ wi*K Alhaniati r<»irf>U ^^^in^iJ^J" 

imposition of thff Austfi^Russian reforms. A strat egic 
railway^ which seems to carry no freight but cannon, no 

passengers save soldiers or prisoners of war, leads thjpugh 
a narrow glen from Uskub to the little village depot of 
Fcrizovitcli — a place which won some celebrity a j-ear or 
two a^o by rising in revolt against its Turkish Mudir (sub- 
prefect), and driving him forth minus his ears. At Feri- 
zovitch Albania begins. The outward sign that its frontier 
has been passed is to be seen in the tobacco-shops. The 
little booths stand open to the street, and lithe men in white 
I caps — the true Albanian rarely wears a fez — sit cr oss-legge d 
behind great heaps of contraband tobacco. They sell it 
openly, without disguise. There once were branches of 
the Turkish tobacco monopoly in Albania^ but it proved 



Digitized by Gopgle 




Digitized by Google 



THE ALBANIANS 



263 



so easy to murder their managers, and so difhcult to check 
tlic trade in "free" tobacco, that they have long ceased 
to exist. Those fragrant heaps of native leaves are the 
scutcheon of Albanian anarchy, the symbol of the failure 
of the Turks to make, even in externals, the faintest im- 
pression upon this race of mountaineers. Between three 
and four years ago, in consequence of a inurderuua but 
fortunately unsuccessful attack on the Austn.m consul in 
Prizrend, a few beginnings of ordered g( )VLiii!nent were 
made in that town. The blood of the consuls is always the 
seed of civilisation in Turkey. In Ipek and in Djacova 
there is still literally no law and no court of jubtice. The 
civil code, more or less on the Napoleonic model, which 
Turkey possesses, is not in force in these towns. Such 
justice as is administered is dealt out by religious func- 
tionaries whose code is the Koran. In all that belongs to 
the civil side of politics, we are stil! in the heyday of Islam. 
The kadi administers the law as it was laid down by the 
Prophet, and his court otwierves the same maxims and the 
same ceremonies which prevailed when the Barmecides 
were Caliphs in Bagdad. It is still the world of the 
"Arabian Nights," and here in Europe, within a day's 
journey of the railway that leads to Vienna^ we are in 
the East and the Middle Ages. Elsewhere in Albankn-^t 
Scutari, for example— «ven the law of the Koran is onreoo^ 
nised. The only canon of justice is the antique code of 
the Albanian clans, which must be pretty much what it was 
when Achilles led his myrmidons to Troy. It deals chiefly 
with murder and its punishment, explains in what circum- 
stances a man's house must be burned to the ground, when 
the son must die for the sins of the father, and under what 
conditions a man must take to the hills and devote himsell 
in pursuit of vengeance to a life of outlawry. The Turki^ 
despairing of leplad^g this code by anything of their own, 
gave up the struggle, and actually printed a translation of a 
crude version of it in the official calendar of the Vilayet 
of Scutari, thus adopting it as the law of the land. The 
historian in search of ironies and anomalies could find no 
stranger contrast than this of Tmks and Alhaniant- -thf 



Digitized by Google 



264 MACEDONIA 

one, an Asiatic nee of Mongol blood and ffae most meagre 
intellectual endowment, yet ponesaed, thanks to Arabian 
infloence^ of a fairly humane and elaborate code of laws ; 
the otheTi a European people of Aryan atoc^ lx>asting 
in part a certain nominal Christianity, g^ed, quick, and 
intelligent, and in contact through the ages with Greek and 
Italian civilisations, yet content in the twentieth century 
with a set of institutions which have remained unaltered 
since the first days of the Aryan migration. A show, 
however, was beiiig made of ^nging all this when we 
were in Pricrend. T wo ne w jud^^es had beeo_gggt.to 
Sc utari, a Jew and a 6re ek. B oth ha<^ been du ly mwr. 
der^i: Two mwe had arrived in Pri sren d, a^ CTvian 
ren^de" and a jew, and they we re awaifang ev ents, 
Turkish officials' in AlbanTa pass Their lives m awai ting 
events. They bring little furniture with them, and feel 
their way cautiously before they unpack more than the bare 
necessities of life. The A lbanians have a short wav of 
demanding the removal of obnoxious officials. They 
simply make an*" appoirance e n masse , rifle* in hand, 
round the official residence, and i n a lew hguisl^ time a 
cavalcade is courteously escorting its late Governor towards 
the dull plains where tarae men purchase their ready- 
made cigarettes from the licensed shot>s of the Turkish 
Regie. 

Some ye;us ago an unusually enterprising Turkish ufhcial 
compiled a work which describes itself as the Year-book of 
the Vilayet of Kossovo. It contains statistics oi populatu iii, 
and taxation returns for every town and district of the 
province. It has long since grown obsolete, for as the 
years roll by, only the date on the cover is altered. There 
is one item, however, which has never grown an tigu.iicd. 
It relates to the districts of Djacova and Ipek^ of which 
it is truthfully stated on a blank page that *' no reliable 
statistics have yet been published." The plain fact is that 
Djacova and Ipek pay no taxes, and furnish no recruits to, 
the Turkish army. It seeaifid^jforLa moment a-s though ^11 
this would be changed^, jnd in 1^03 there were smo oth 
official prophets who suppc^ed that after a sharp revolt 



Digitized by Google 



THE ALBANIANS 



265 



Albania had been co vvlcI and rciormed. It was a time of 
turmoil. Even the railway was forbidden to Europeans, 
and it was by a ruse, over which it is prudent to throw a 
veil of obscurity, that I contrived, during a brief absence 
of Hihni Pasha from Uskub, to penetrate to Prizrend. 
Natives shook their heads, and spoke of the journey as 
an impossible adventure. It was twelve nionlhs since 
a European had been there, and he had gone in the 
train of two consuls, with a squadron of cavalry to 
guard him. 

I left Uskub with high expectations. What might one 
not discover in that mysterious region, as strange as Arabia, 
as distant as the Soudan ? I was not disappointed. I 
witnessed two miracles. I saw Albania tranquil, and dis- 
covered an official Turkish version of {Missing events which 
was substantially true. For the moment Prizrend was like 
any other town in Turkish Europe. I L was outward ly 
stolid and c alm. The Albanians, who up till two months 
before had never crossed ^the jroad mthpvT^snHjgir^ 
rifles on their shoulders, were going about unarmed. In 
the town nothing reminded you that you were in a country 
where no stranger dare walk alone — unless, indeed, you 
happened to look behind as you passed down some narrow 
secret street and detected an Albanian in the act of 
solemnly spitting on the ground to express his indignation 
at your presence. There l^j^d re ally been "a sort of w ar" 
in Albama. A batde di d really take place near E)jacova. 
The Albanians wctc reairy more" or jess co wed, a n3 toFthe 
moment they had accep ted the ref orms." 

'^^^ fKinnfllfi' 'p*'*" in Europe suddenly 
realised tluit there was an Albanian question, because an 
unfortunate Russian consul had been mllrdered in M itro- 
vitza, there were something like two th ousand^banians 
in arms round the town, suuTlSie incon^ Turkish 
fflrrison waswondenng upo n wh ich side it would be more 
jmident to fight. And then week by^ week _the faithful 
ragged regiments from Asia Minor began to arrive. By 
May tlicrc wciti. thirty battalions ready to move. It was 
no Liiviai operation. The Suitaa did not risk iioops in 



Digitized by Google 



266 



MACEDONIA 



mnil detachme nts. And when thirty battalions came t o 

Prizrend rflir^"**^ fnr fh#> rfanttm^n fr> Hn 

They retmned pnidentiy to their v ^f||agft«r ^" d left tfieir 
rifles at home. It j m^ doubtless humiliating : for vo ar 
Albanian regards his rifle as our forefathers regarded their 
swords ; it Is Uie b adge ot nob ility^r Tnot^ f manh^ijdil^aiid, 
moreover,' in thb climate it is ratfier moRTneoessary than 
clothing. Bu^ aftor all- in Prizrend there wa s no parti» 
coJar need td'resist 'Tlie' thirty battalions interfered w ith 
nobooy, and noDody interler eB with thS I It is true that 
twenty men wm arreited, bat as only three of them were 
persons of tnq^ortance the incident could hardly be re- 
presented as a casus bsttL T he thirty b attalions rested^ in 
dignity, and presently t hey moved on To Diacova . 

DjacQva" despi ses pri zrend. In Prigrend there are tw o 
European families^ while the soil of Djaixwra is still dean . 
And accordingly Djacova decided to incfulge in passive 
resistance. For five whqle^ days th e market was clo sed^ 
which is in the East the deadliest act of de^ance. The 
thirty battalions and their three Pashas sat chafing while 
the telegraph worked. The three Pashas were not unani- 
mous — why else should they be there ? In Turkish armies 
there are always three Pashas — one to propose, one to 
oppose, and one to telegraph to Constantinople. Day after 
day the thirty battalions lay idle. Day after day the shops 
were closed. And Constantinople cautioned diplomacy. 
There must be no violence, no inconsiderate urgency, for 
Albanians are not infidels. But at latst the PXdej.., came 
which permitted the three Pashas and the thirty battalions 
to require the Albanians of Djacova m the Sultan's name to 
open their shops. On the sixth day the sTiops were duly 
opened, and in the Sultan's name they displayed once. more 
to the eye of day and His Majesty's troops the ex celle nt 
contraband tobacco for which the district is so justly 
famous. It was the beginning of the end. The Albania ns 
in the hills treated the enforced openin g of th e shops as a 
declaration ol war, and proceeded to take a cavalf Y 
in an ambuscade. Somethiag__lIke tKirtv troopefs were 
killed, and *h**n at Ungth T'BtK*^. acted in earnest For on e 



Digitized by CopgI( 



THE ALBANIANS 



267 



Hay ti«tt fipi^f jng, Thff r^*«^^nfl ttr** i 

hflls, and the Tur ks assaile d them with artillery. At thei . 
end of_thc_day the Albanians still he ld their rocks, and each | j 
side had los t somewh ere be tween eij^hty and j)ne hundred j I 
men. Then, came f urth er days of inaction, during whidi 
the Turks contented thmMlyjn. «ith_.destroying about , 
n inety mediae val t owOT o r jtoti/^. These kouUs play sbin e I 
considerable par ! in the _f eu d al org^jiisation Albania. ^ 
Only a rich chief can build a kotile. Since he is rich he . 
must have been unscrupulous, and since he is bold he j 
becomes a leader. To destroy his tower is in some sense ^ 
to sap liis intluciice. Meantime, however^ Turkish rein- 
forcements were moving up from Ipek, and the Albanians f 
ran the risk of being taken in flank. They were without 
commissariat or organisation, and their food and ammu- , 
nition vvere^aU but exhaus ted. Day by d ay they dwindled \ 
away, and when at length the thirty battalions advanced, the \ 
hills were deserted." For ^hat year there was ~rio more * 
fighting. At~lVIitrovitza, \yh ere some nine hundred tribes- 
men had attempted to rush the bridge against Turkish 
cannon, an^again at Djacova the Albanians felt they had [ 
done enough for honour. They knew the Turks too well i 
to take their threats of a permanent occupation and a I 
regular administration TiT'earnest. "But in JKny_ event .they ! 
lacked the organi safio n for a prolonged_campaign. At the 

siimmnr^*^ ftf thpir rhip>'fg Mrh man haH marrhtf»H in th<> 

ratdezvous cauijing^ as many cartridges 2^_he could wear 
u pon hi s pers on. When the se ha d t^e en exhausted the re 
was nothing more to be done> The Al b^ iang qflBm 

Capable o f the Io ng''ypq^' prpparaHon which prg(p<>rif 

a Bulgarian revol t. T hey collect no war chesty and they 
amass no magazi nes of ammunition. Th f jy f a ffin g?; ar. | 
cordmi^y" arealarM and if the | 

Turks can survive un til each man has shot away his belt- I 
fttl of cartric^gH^ tliey. .maj enjoy their Jlcuuilch---ontii the 
following spring. 

And so for a season the comedy of reforms went on. 
Under the personal supervision of Hilmi Pasha the blank 
pages in the calendar of the Vilayet of Kbtsovo were 



Digitized by Google 



268 



MACEDONIA 



gradoally filled in^ and beautiful lists were prepared showing - 
how much these wild districts ought to pay in cattle-taxes, 
and how many conscripts they should furnish to l)e the 
despair of Turkish officers.* The budget of the Vilayet 
showed how the blessings of civilisation had already been 
squandered with a hmsh hand on these wild regions. 
Half-way on the road to Prizrend we met a Greek engineer. 
He was a civilised man who had studied in Vienna, and he 
^adly stopped to talk with us and tell his tale. He had 
been for six months in the Turkish service. He had 
been sent to Scutari to inspect the roads — a grim Turkish 
joke, it seems he was actually sent on a voyage of 
discovery to look for bridges, but although he was sur- 
rounded by a powerful Turkish escort, the Albanians 
forbade him to on. Four months later he was trans- 
ferrrcl to l^n/rcnd. He was tolcl that in a week the road 
iiom Prizrend to the railway at Ferizovitch would be 
repaired, and he proceeded to inspect it. Ten per cent, of 
the Macedonian revenues, so Hilmi Paslia had told mc, had 
been set apart for the repair of the roads. Something had 
indeed been done. Two moiuiis before our visit the road 
was a species of torrent-bed which wandered among rocks 
and rivulets. After a careful ni.-^pcction we were able to 
discover, over a space of several miles, murderous pegs 
driven into the centre of it at intervals of three hundred 
paces. These were the reiui ins. The hand of man had 
undoubtedly made its mark on the tnrrent-bed, and when 
oxen tripped over the pet^s and wheels broke against them 
the natives thanked Europe for the boon. But as for the 
Greek engineer, he liad seen enough. He was tired of 
waiting for next week. The nioney and the labour to 
repair the road were not forthcormng, and he was on his 
way to Uskub to tender his resignation. He seemed to me 

• The name by which liie Aibauiaiis describe their Tui ki>h ofi^rs 
is quite unprintable ; suffice it to say that it breathes a withering ooo- 
tempt. The result is that an Albanian regiment in time of war or 
revolution does orociseiy as it pleases. I have heaiti a European 
witness describe now flie Albanian conscripts emplovod ia Adrianople 
during the late rebellion instead of marching, rode about in oonunan- 
deeced Jaodaus. 



Digitized by Google 



THE AUiANIANS 



269 



typical of all that ihe Turks had done in these Albanian 
regions to realise the reforms. They boasted that they had 
purged the gendarmerie of its worst characters. Its ranks 
were, in fact, recruitcc! from amonj^ the more enterprising 
robbers of the country. A few of the more notorious had 
been dlSInls^cc]. Already they had begun to return. In the 
course of a single stroll through Prizrend two gendannes 
were pointed out to me, both of them notable murderers, 
who had been cashiered and then reinstated. For the rest, 
a very few Christians have been enrolled in the ranks. I 
am bound in fairness to say that some precautions had been 
taken to ensure their safety. Tliey spent their day shut up 
in the police-ofhce, lest the Albanians should see them ; and 
when they returned to their homes at night, they were not 
allowed to take their rifles with them, as their Moslem 
comrades did. It was thought that the Albanians might 
fed less insulted if these Giaour policemen went about 
harmless and unarmed. That an infidel should carry a rifle 
and arrest one of the faithful would have been intolerable. 
And if, after all, the Albanians should fall upon the 
defenceless gendarmes as they returned to their homes, 
there would be a minimum of bloodshed. From a certain 
standpoint this refusal to arm the new recruits must be 
view«l as a humanitarian measure. 

Returning through Uskub, nearly a^ear later^ J Jjparqed 
(April, 1904 ) som ethi ng of the seque l to th is curiooa 
chapfer jF jist ory. , The first atf^m^^^ ^pfy^^'itTWaH/^w 

and conscriptioi) at . the expense of the Ghegs of pjacova 
and the North had led once mor e to a rising^ th|s time more 
extensive and*" more_^ngs0ui8. Dibra als ip wan up in 
arms^ and j;i';f^.r^* tV TwIr^ ^'^T^^y^^ tiri*«Ku c^f^^y in 
preventing the union of the contingents from th at reg ion 
with the rebels of Liuma and Djacova, they mi^t have had ^ 
to 'face a somewhat serious rebeinoii. As it was, jl very 

considerab le T urkish fQfgg unHf»r Rhalrir Pagha tpaB anr, 

rounded near Djacova, and would have had no resource but 
capitulation had not Shemsi Pasha marched, irom, Uskub .at 
the Tiead of a formidable army. The negotiations which 
followed ended in a substantial success for the Albanians. 



Digitized by Google 



I 



270 MACEDONIA 

The Turin did not quite consent to renounce their rights to 
raise taxes and enrol condcripts in Upper Albania* but thej 
did agree to postpone these obnoxioos operations for two 
years— a term which is likely enough to prove an equivalent 
to the Greek Kalends. The Turks, of course, are compelled 
in deference to Austria anf Russia, to contijiue to make a 
show of introducing reforms, and from time to time some 
Christian Servian gendarmes are enrolled. But it is 
tolerably certain that if these attempts should* seem too 
seri ous or t oo persistent, the Al banians ma rise <mce m ore. 

Itls a little" difficuTTlo "explain the motives which "have 
brought about these Albanian risings. When a Bulgarian 
takes a rifle in his hand, appeals to the sympathy of Europe, 
invokes the sanctity of the Berlin Treaty, and says tfiat he 
wants liberty and lutonomy, reforms and a constitution, we 
think that wc know what he means. He uses the catch- 
words of Webtcin Europe, and his attitude towards our- 
selves 1, deferential. But the Albanians have defied Europe, 
Tliey began their campaign by murdering M. Sterbina, the 
Russian Consul at Mitrovitza. And their object seems to 
be to protest against reforrn. "Certainly7 if ^ve look no 
further than the surface^ their movement is not deser\'inL^ of 
much sympathy. It seems to be contebsedly reactionary, 
and Europe has some excuse i? she s^iipposes th at the y are 
'more fanatical than the Turks tliemselves. Their. leaders, 
! too, are men of the oIJ school, chiefs whom ilie average 
i Christian of the Balkans describes without hesitation as 
brigands/* It is true th:it some oFtliem have risen to 
consideration through rapme. A brigand or a successful 
"rural guard" will often retire on the proceeds of his 
robberies, build himself a media;val keep, and terrorise 
the nei!:^hb()urhood. His district becomes an Alsatia, a 
refuge for every desperate outl.i\y, and he concludes no 
treaties of extradition. The Turks make it t_heir_p.phcy 
to humour him. 1 he liiglnvavm in of yesterday is decorated 
to-day, and the path is open to uniiorras and ofi&ces. He 
becomes a kingmaker in his little territory. At his com- 
plaint the prefect (k'rihnakam) is dismissed, and it he makes 

common cause with a few of his ieilow " chiefs " he may 



Digitized by Google 



THE ALBANIANS 



271 



even hope to unseat a jfalt* He Is free to rob, free to 
murder^ free . to „gcQ3BLj:ich. No' Cfimfiin flarF Ffimgaln 
against him, for the local officials are his creatures. If he 
has a behest to aialE^ he need only send tiie beflman round 
the town to shout it to the people. When it was rumoored 
that a Russian consul was coming to Mitrovitza the chief 
Isa Bditinax sent his henchman publicly drumming through 
the streets with the cry, " I, Isa Bol^tinaz, forbid any man of 
Mitrovitza to let his house to the Russian Consul, and if he 
does, it will be the worse for him." But the better class of 
these men are hereditary chieftains of old families, who have 
won fKeir maffiaT repufafion, not m brigandage, but by 
prowess in local feuds. Isa Boldtinaz, for example, spent 
six yccirs " in the mountains " avenging the murder of a 
relative. In the course of A— campaign of this sort an 
Albanian ma;^ play the brigand, in the sense that he lives 
upon the country; but his object is not so much plunder as 
revenge. The distinction may seem a subtle one. Cer- 
tainly the men behind this movement — Suleiman Batusha 
and Isa Bol6tinaz, for example — are the representatives of 
the old anarchical tradition. To some of them anarchy is 
a vested interest, to others it r epres ents a sentiment of 
iadependence. 

At bottom th e Albanian movement is, like all Balkan 
movements, inspired by a nationalist ideal, and by a wish 
to obtain emancipation from Turkish rule, and if it wears 
an appearance of hostility to Europe that is only because 
Europe ignored Albania in the Berlin Treaty, and because 
she has made herself in practice the protectress of the Slavs, 
with whom the Albanians have a traditional feud. I have 
often tried, in conversation with Albanians, to obtain some 
clue to their attitude. The Ghegs have, as a rule^, too little 
education to explain with any clearness what it really is they 
mean and want. The rising was an instinctive outburst. 
But if one can imagine a Gheg primitive enough to share 
the views of Boletinaz and his tribesmen, and educated 
enough to state them clearly, it is somewhat in this way 
that he would explain the national attitude : ** We 
Albanian^" he would say, ''are the original and autoch* 



L;iyui<.ca Ly GoOglc 



MACEDONIA 



thonoos race of the Balkans. The Slavs are conquerora 
and immigrants, who came but yesterday from Asia. As 
for the Bulguians, they are a Mongol trilie which has no 
business in Europe. The Russians may call themselves 
Europeans^ but when their consuls come here and lord it 
over us witii their whi ps, we notice their little eyes and their 
high cheekbonesi and we feel that they too are Tartars. 
The Servians, under their Tsar Duahan, conquered tibe 
country ^idi tiiey have the impudence to call 'Old 
Servia.' They settled there and drove us back for a 
season to our mountains. But little by little we have 
regained our own. 'Old Servia' is Albanian once more 
to-day, as it always was and always \y ill be. I t is true that 
a minority of Servians remains, protected by Russia . She 
has even sent up a handful of Russian monks from Mount 
Athos to hold the sacred Servian monastery of DetchanL 
Why is it that she defends our hereditary enemies? 
Because they are Slavs. '^'^ ftfThfiillffl *f^/^«t««* 
nothing but the device ot^ Panslavisi.xPOSilutacy. Wlix. 
does Russia confine her attention on ly to Ae Vilayet of 

KOSSOVO, labile- Ai> df^ n#hmg Jannina anH fnr 

Scutari ? Because there^ are J?!^YI.Jn..JK.ossavo. y^b^ 
does she do nothing to help us w i th our schools and our 
language ? Because we are,not_Slays. These reforms are 

only intended to benefit tiie Slavs. Why^ thpn, shnnlH we 

submit to them ? Russia tells you that there ought to be 
Christians in the gendarmerie, and you imagine that we are 
fanatical because we oppose her. It is aot-a- question 
between Moslem and Christian at all. There were 
hunJn-ti-. of Catholic i\l banian- ni um ranks when we 
fouL^ht ;it Mitrovitza :in(l ul Djacova. In poiiii of fact, 
when Russia says that there ought to be Christians in the 
gendarmerie, she means Servian Christians. When the time 
came for enlisting Christian gendarmes, whom did the 
Russian consuls recommend ? They got together all 
their own spies, their agents provocateurs^ the most 
nolorunis inalruaicms of the Slav propaganda, and forced 
the Turks to put them into uniforms and to give them 
rifles. Shall we allow these men to rule over us ? As for 



Digitized by Google 



THE ALBANIANS 



Austria, we all know that her dream is to annex Albania, 

and she too is a Slav Power. Her consuls are never 
Germans. They are always Czechs or Croats or Poles. 
Our programme is Albania, lor the Albanians, and we do 
not intend to submit to any foreign ciomniation, and 
certainly nol to that of the Slavs. If the Turks cannot 
protect us againsl Panslavism, Lbtjii^ivu ^iie .4uitc .Ji^ep^^^^ 
..Turks. We have never accepted their yoke. 
We hav e preserved our raistnmK, nur Inngnage, and our 
local independence. Byt we have never paid taxes. We 
have fought as volunteers^fqr Jhe Sultan in every Turkish 
war — at Plevna as at Domokos — but we have never worn 
the Turkish uniform or accepted the slavery of fhe Barracks. 
You profess to be the friends of the Cretans and the Bul- 
garians when they defend their freedom. Why do you 
wish to impose the Turkish yoke upon us ? It is, I 
suppose, because we are not Slavs, or because so many 
of us are Moslems. That is your tolerimce. N0| we^ do^ 

not want reforms. We pr gl'er lib t rty." 

My imaginary Albanian has said some thmgs which are 
absurd and other things which are true. One must look 
behind words. It was not against reform tliat the 
Albanians rose, but a;[;ainst the tightennig gi Turkish 
control, and the more distant menace involved in the 
predominance of Austria and Russia. Europe did a 
monstrous thing when she entrusted the destinies of 
Macedonia to two interested Powers. Both Russia and 
Austria are partisans in the Macedonian chaos. For 
generations they have been engaged in propagandas of 
their own, furthering the interests of one race against 
another to secure their own position and prepare their 
future claims. It was absurd to suppose that they could 
play the rSle of impartial arbiters. The Albanians speak 
the truth when they insist that they are themselvesi by 
virtue of their numberSi overwhelmingly the preponderant 
population of ''Old Searvia"; but just in so fkr as they 
show themselves incapable of respecting the claims of the 
Servian minority, they destroy their own natural right to 
govern. 

T 



Digitized by Google 



*74 



MACEDONU 



§ VII.— Old Servia. 

Primnd stands on the low foothills of greater mountains. 
Its predpitous streets— with the brawling stream^ the shady 
poplar groves^ the cool rose gardens of dervish monasteries^ 
the graceful mosqaes, and the secret, all but castellated houses 
that rarely expose a timid window to the outer world — rise 
. towards the crumbling Turkish citadel on the hill, it is a 
hill of memories and vistas. At your feet lies the great 
plain of Kossovo, where the Servian Empire was shattered 
at the first shock of the invading Osmanlis. Par in the 
distance, to the north, is a dark range of momitains 
which is the frontier of New Servia. To the west, 
beyond Ipek, rises a vast Alpine wall of purple and 
white, and beyond it, too, is liberty. It Is the frontier of 
Montenegro, where yet another branch of tiie Servian race 
has maintained itself and freedom. And behind lies the 
greater past A narrow valley runs up to the mountains 
behind*-^n the right a green hill, on the left a bare cliff, 
and between them, in the distance, the blue peaks of the 
Schar Dagh. In the midst of the valley rises a sheer rock, 
and on its summit stands the old castle of Tsar Doshaa. 
Here he lived and reigned, a Servian king amid a Servian 
people. 

By some half-ironical convention this country that once 
was Dushan's, within sight of the two free Servian lands, is 
known as ^' Old Servia." It is the Servia that has been. I 
came expecting to find, as one finds elsewhere in Macedonia, 
a population by majority Christian, living under the rule of 
a Moslem minority. Two centuries ago that is what a 
European traveller would have found. To-day the Serbs 
are a remnant which has dwindled by emigration, massacre, 
and forced conversion, to the rank of a mere third of the 
population. In the two districts of Frizrend and Ipek there 
are no more than 5,000 Servian householders, against 20,000 
or 25,000 Albanian families. In alljO lj Servia there are n ot 
as many Servian families as thercaii^ .Albanian families in 
Ipek and Prizrend alone. It was oth erwise in the past 
History tells of two great emigrations en masse from Old 



Digitized by Google 



THE ALBANIANS 



Scrviau In 1680 the Servian Patriarch placed himself at the 
head of xoo^ooo of his people who had found Turkish rule 
intolerable^ and with their flocks and herds^ their cradles 
and ploughs, they wandered to Garlowits in Hungary. 
Fifty years later a second human swarm, 30,000 strong, took 
the same road It was the best and the most patriotic 
element of the Servian population that sou^t a refuge and 
a future in a Christian country, and practically every priest 
in the diocese followed the Patriarch to save his faith. 
The Servian population which remained, witiiout leaders, 
teachers^ or priests fell a natural victim to the Turks and the 
Albanians. Whole regions still Servian in blood and 
language embraced Islam at the point of the sword. The 
process went on in this forgotten country on the fringe of 
Europe even within the mcinory of the present l^l nLr;ai()ii. 
Tiurty years ai^o the broad di^Uict of Goia, nc.u I^nzicnd, 
was ravigcd, decimated, and converted. Its inhabitants 
speak only Servian, and as far as they dare they mainlaui 
the tradition of their Christian past. They will go to the 
gi i at n^ionastery of the neighbourhood on its annual festival. 
The women will often beg a priest to pray for Uiem or 
to give them holy water, and sometimes they will lie on the 
ground in the churchyard that the priest may btep over them 
as he carries the Eucharist, in tlic liupe ot obtaining a silent 
blessing. If ever the Turk departs they will venture^ no 
doubt, to return to the faith of their fathers. 

Of the rest of the Christian Servian population of Old 
Servia, for every nine who remam, one has fit c! in despair to 
free Servia within recent years. The remanider, unarmed 
and unprotected, survive only by entering into a species of 
feudal relationship with some Albanian brave. The Albanian 
is euphemistically described as their ** protector." He lives 
on tolerably friendly terms with his Servian vassal. He 
is usually ready to shield him from other Albanians, and in 
return he demands endless blackmail in an infinite variety of 
forms^ If the Servian has money he pays in money. There 
is a recognised etiquette even in brigandage. There arrives 
one fine day an emissary who carries a little parcel which he 
presents with much ceremony to the headman of the village* 



Digitized by Google 



276 



MACEDONIA 



The parcel contains it may be ten, it may be twenty beans» 
with a cartridge tumbling amongst them. The beans repre- 
sent silver dollars, and if gold is wanted their place is taken 
by ears of maize. The cartridge speaks for itself. It is 
death to refuse. But if the peasants are too poor to be 
blacknmled there are other methods of exaction. They can 
be compelled to do forced labour for an indefinite number 
of days. But even so the system is ineffidenti and the pro- 
tector fails at need. There are few Servian villages which 
are not robbed periodically of all their sheep and cattle^l 
could give names of typical cases if that would serve any 
purpose. For two or three years the village remains in a 
slough of abject poverfy, and then by hard work purchases 
once more the b^nnings of a herd, only in due course to 
lose it again. I tried to find out what the system of land 
tenure was. My questions, as a rule, met with a smile. The 
system of land tenure in this country, where the Koran and 
the rifle are the only law, is what the Albanian chief of the 
district chooses to make it. The Servian peasants, children 
of the soil, are tenants at will, exposed to every caprice of 
their domestic conquerors. YcLLr by year tlie Albanian lull- 
men encroach upon tlic plain, and year by 5^ear the Servian 
peasant disappear before them. Hunger, want, and disease 
are the n.itur;il acconipamments of this daily oppre^ion. 
One muy gau^e the poverty of this country from the fact 
that a day's wage averages five or six metallics — say three 
English pence. Round Uskub it stands at ten pence, and 
Uskub is poor. But then if labour can be had for the asking 
by a master who has only to toy with a jewelled pi:itol in his 
belt the market price is inevitably low. The children grow- 
up half iiuunshed and scarcely clad, and the result, as the 
doctors of Prizrend told me, is an astonishing prevalence of 
lung diseases and anajmia in this superb climate with its 
brisk mountain air, its pure water, and its generous sun. 
One is a little apt to think of the Albainan question as an 
interesting diplomatic problem, a fascinating ethnological 
puzzle. It struck me in a different light on market-day when 
the peasant women came toiling in, bent and wrinkled, with 
their babies on their backs, and round their meagre inures 



Digitized by Googic 



THE ALBANIANS 



277 



a ooUectioii of rags that barely satisfied flie demands of 
modesty. We ask them what they have brought to seU. It 
may be half a dosen eggs, it may be a doxen. And the 
price ? A halfpenny apiece^ or less. And where did they 
come from? There were some vrho had come from a 
village ten and even fifteen miles away. To sell a few eggs 
for threepence these Servian women will walk a matter of 
twenty dangerous miles. It is their one chance of keeping 
alive. The threepence will buy a bag of Indian meal that 
will serve the family for a few days, eked out with onions 
and wild liLi bs. And by next market-day there will be; a few 
more eggs to sell, if liic saints arc <4(H)d — unless, indeed, 
some hungry, unpaid Turkish dL-tachment should pass 
through the village and requisition the few hens that stand 
between the peasants and famine. 

Those women, in their misery and nakedness, are the 
oihcr side of the gay pit.tuic uf Albanian chivalry. With all 
my memories of Bcktashi tolerance and Arnaut patriotism, 
framed in a picture of marvellous mountain scenery — the 
white snows of the Schar Dagh, crisp and clean on the mid- 
summer day when we crossed them, its cold, exhilaratinir nir, 
its Alpine roses, its hillsides of gentians and forqct niL -nots 
— I realise painfully that 1 have visited the most miserable 
corner of Europe. 

I VIII.— The Future. 

Of the future of Albania it is difficult to write witli any 
measure oi comfort or conviction. This gifted and in- 
teresting race has awakened too late, and one fears tfi at tiie 
crisis in its fortune?^ must come before it iias had the leisure 
to prepare itself for freedom. It has won no recognition 
from diplomacy, and the young States which surround it 
have regarded it as their legitimate inheritance. Greece 
lays cUim to Epirus, and Servia to the plain of Kossovo as 
far as the mountains which rise behind Prizrend, while 
Montenegro, the especial proUgd of the Tsars, has also her 
ambitions. Carved up among these alien countriesy Albania 
would go the way of Poland, and her dfcam of a national 



Digitized by Google 



MACEDONIA 



existence would have vanished almost before H had b^ua 
to inspire. Beyond these minor competitors stand Italy 
and Austria, each anxious to obtain a share, if not the whole. 

liidL'Lci, the only hope that seems permissible is that among 
so nicinv claimants, the easiest and the least dangerous solu- 
tion nvdy uiLcr all piuvc to be an autonomy upon naliuuai 
lines. 

The claim of Greece to Epirus rests on a hoary confusion. 
The Christian minority of Lower Albania may be Oi Ihodox 
in religion, but it is Greek neither in lani^uage nor in race. 
And yet one must admit that a Greek occupation of Epirus 
would not be an unmixed evil. There ib a large population 
which is still Greek in sympathy, and Greek in such culture 
as it possesses. A great number of the Moslems would un- 
doubtedly return under any Christian rule to the faith of 
their fathers. In two generations Epirus would be as much 
Greek as Attica is to-day. For the greater part of the popu- 
lation of Northern Greece is undoubtedly Albanian in origin. 
The addition of so large an Albanian clement to the Greek 
kingdom would, on the other hand, dilute its Hellenic 
character still further, and possibly the Albanians would be 
strong enough to force the Greeks into some reluctant show 
of tolerance, and even into a tardy recognition of their 
language. But the chief objection to this solution is, to my 
mind, that it would rob Albania of its most progressive and 
enlightened element. An Albania which included £pints 
would already contain a considerable population on a 
relatively high level of civilisation, which might be trusted 
to leaven the whole mass. Deprived of the Epirotes^ Albania 
would be a little principaUty of savages whose progress 
towards order and letters would be intolerably slow. 

The case for a Servian annexation in the North is at once 
stronger and weaker. While there is no considerable Greek 
population in Southern Albania, there is a large Servian ele» 
ment in the North. On the other hand, there is a traditional 
feud between Servians and Albanians which would render 
the peaceable administration of the country under a Servian 
hegemony more than difficult. The Greek genius exerts 
a certain ascendancy and fascination over the S<mthem 



Digitized by Googlc 



THE ALBANIANS 



279 



Albanians. It has been a dvilising inflncnoe. It can quote 
a long and often friendly intercourse^ and to bridge the con- 
nection there is already a large population of aHellenised 
Albanians established in the present Gred^ kingdom— a popu- 
lation as loyal and as advanced as any in tiie Greek worlds 
and one, moreow, which has contributed more than its fair 
share to the laurels of modem Hellenism. With the Serbs 
it is quite otherwise. They have never played the part of 
civilisers in Northern Albania. So far from regarding 
them as his superiors in culture the Albanian has learned 
to despise and to exploit them as his villeins. A Greek 
dominion in Southern Albania would seem comparatively 
natural, and would imply no violent reversal of traditional 
habits of thought. But Servian rule in the North would 
imply a social as well as a political revolution. The Servian 
minority already settled about Prizrend and the plain of 
Kossovo would tend to become a party uf abceiidancy, and 
its novel and irritating pretensions would seem to the 
Albanians pceuliarly degrading and offensive. These local 
Serbs have hitherto held their lives and their property on a 
species of feudal tenure from their Albanian overlords. 1 liat 
they should become prefects and deputies protected fiuin 
Belgrade would be an inversion of every custom and an 
outrage on every prejudice. Moreover, the Servians of 
Servia have not succeed in conciliating their local Albanians 
as the Greeks of Greece have done. When the Southern 
limits of the Servian kinj^dom were enlarged after the Treaty 
of Berlin, the greater number of these Albanians were driven 
across the trontier, and in the process there were wholesale 
evictions and uncompensated confiscations of estates. Both 
races are convinced that the country is theirs by right, and 
it is di£&cult to imagine any satisfactory compromise between 
them. 

The Albanians can boast the advantage of actual posses- 
sion. They form the majority of the population almost 
everywhere between the Smian frontier and the mountains 
behind Prizrend. They are also the aboriginal population, 
and if one goes far enough back, they can r^ard the Ser* 
vianSf with perfect justice as intruders and usurpers. On 



Digitized by Google 



MACEDONIA 



the other band, Kossovo was the metropolis and the cradle 
of the Servian Empire. In Prizrend and in Uskub the great 
Doshan had his capitals. At the monastery ol Detchani, 
near Ipek, the Servian kings were crowned, and rcmnd it 
gathers all that is most sacred in the legendary memories of 
an imaginative race. Nor does their historical claim end 
with the overthrow of Diudian's Empire by the Turkish 
invadm on the field of Koesovo. Up till the dose of the 
seventeenth century Ipek was still the Servian centre^ and 
its Patriarch preserved the identity of the national Church, 
it may t>e true that the Albanians who have coloiused Old 
Servia" during the past two hundred years were only 
resuming posaeision ol hmd which was theirs before the 
Servian Empire existed. But the methods of their settle- 
ment have been those of rapine and usurpation. If they 
succeeded to derelict and unoccupied lands» it was tiieir 
ferocity which had rendered them untenanted. Each race 
has a claim so ancient and legitimate^ and their recent 
relations are so complicated with injustice and the resent- 
ment it bring$ with it, that neither could live happily under 
the dominion of the other. The Serbs could not establish 
themselves without serious iigluing and long years of coer- 
cion, while the Albanians would certainly use authority to 
complete the exile of the Servian race. The Servians lack 
the force to make their rule respected ; the Albanians lack 
the civilisation to laake their do ini nation toleiable. 

Short of the administration oi " Old Sei \ ia, " bv some 
alien Power, whicli could only l)c Austria, there seems no 
tolciablc -olution save its partition between Servia and an 
autonomous Albanian State. Partition would certainly be 
an unaaluial expedient. The country is a phun which lies 
between two ranges of mountains, the northern already 
Servian, the southern certainly Albanian. But there is no 
considerable river or well-marked range of hills dividing it 
which would offer a convenient frontier. If, on the other 
hand, one consults the interests o!: both populations, the 
happiest issue from an awkward dilemma would be to draw 
a conventional frontier somewhere below the Uskub-Mitro- 
vitxa railway, and to give the land to the north to Servia, 



Digitized by Google 



THE ALBANIANS 



281 



leaving the southern moiety to be incorporated in an 
autonomova Albania* The immediate consequence would 
no doutit be a serious unsettlement of the actual populap 
tions. The Albanians of the northern half would probably 
decline to remain under the Servian flag, and their place 
would be taken by Servian refugees from the southern 
territory. If tiiis exchange were consciously effected, and 
supervised by neutral commissioners, it could hardly fail to 
lead to the pacification of the country and to a fair compo* 
sition between the claims of both races. The chief incon* 
venience would be that the Servians would be left with a 
frontier which it would be difficult for them to defend 
against the predatory raids of the Albanians.* 

By giving Epirus to the Greeks, Old Servia to the 
Servians, and by incorporating Dibra in an autonomous 
Macedonia, it would doubtless be possible to reduce 
Albania to very modest proportions. Bui liieie is no 
Balkan uicc save the Albanians which possesses the blcn- 
dercst claim to the couiuiy that lies between Elbasan and 
Scutari. If those poor and sparsely-peopled highl ands were 
to be created an independent principality, it would be 
condemned to continual poverty and to a sa\'agerv without 
hope of redemption. It is oiiiy by includiu*^ wulnn the 
limits of a free Albaina all the lands inhabited by the 
Albanian race, the populous region of Prizrend and 
Djacova, as well as the more civilised province of Epirus, 
that a worthy future can be assured to her. The question- 
begi^ing name of "Old Servia" settles no titles, while the 
Greek claim to Epirus rtst^^ on no better foundation than 
the confusion of the terms ( ] reek and Orthodox. Europe 
has fallen into a deplorable habit of ignorini^ the claims 
of the Mohamedan inhabitants of European Turkey. 
Where they are Turkish by race, and form the minority of 
a population, it is no grave error to discount their existence. 

* The 8aaie problem ariset in the Sendjak of Novi>Ba»ur, where the 

population is also p;irtly Albanian and partly Servian, but Austria is 
never likely to renounce the ri^ht of military occupation conferred 
upon her by the Treaty of Ikiiin. If she were to reaounce this terri- 
tory a union of Montenegr v 1! Ssrvia woald become poeaible, end 
that Atistm is boood at all haiarcis to pcareat 



Digitized by Google 



282 



MACEDONIA 



They hxft litde national aeniunent They can thrive only 
under a retrograde administration and a Mtiasalnian theo* 
cracy. Under any alien Christian rule they invariably 
emigrate. But the Moslem Albanians are in a totally 
different case. They form the maj ority of their race. They 
have a fervent if primitive national sentiment They are 
capable of progress, nor do they owe their position to the 
favour of an Asiatic conqueror. To deny them a political 
future because of their loosely-held creed, and to confound 
them in the fortunes of the Slavs and the Greeks, would be 
an injustice which only intolerance could explain, an error 
which only ignorance could excuse. 

Autonomy has become a practical policy for Albania 
because the rivalries of the two Great Powers which aspire 
to its possession arc aculc .^iiid iiicoiiipatible. Austria has 
long aspired to ihc reversion of Turkish territory ; and Italy, 
Since the failure oi her Abyssinian advenliire, has been 
active in asserting her clainr-,. Austria starts with many 
advantages. She is a Catholic Power. She has long 
enjoyed a protectorate over the Albanian Catholics, and in 
thcin she has a powerful army of partisans. Italy, on the 
other hand, is regarded by the Catholic Albanians as an 
impious State winch lias persecuted and imprisoned the 
Pope. To the northern Albanians the Italians are atheists, 
to the southerns they are " latins," and erich name serves 
to excite an inveterate and almost insuperable prejudice. 
Austria has a further superiority in her wealth, whereas the 
Italians are regarded as an impecunious race of adventurers 
who are anxious to exploit the country and to eat up the 
mineral wealth which it is supposed to contain. The 
obvious argument in favour ot Italy, that she is a Liberal 
Power, does not appear to weigh with the Albanians as it 
ought. Their instincts are monarchical and aristocratic, 
and they do not realise how much they might gain from 
the generous and sympathetic democracy of Ttily. 

Their thoughts are for the present so wholly concentrated 
on the preservation of their language that they regard 
Austria only as a friend who has recoc:;nised and assisted 
this propaganda* It i& true that Austria has subsidised 



Digitized by Google 



THE ALBANIANS 



28j 



some of their publications riiid created a chair of Albanian 
at Vienna.* On the otiier hand, while she assists their 
struggles outside Turkey, she has done nothing whatever to 
aid them within its borders. A little pressure at Constanti- 
nople would have saved their school at Koritza. But Austria 
has never been known to display her interest in this practical 
fashion. She doesenout^h to persuade the Albanians that she 
is sympathetic, enough (o assure them that under her rule 
they would enjoy full liberty to cultivate their own tongue ; 
but she does not do enough to civihse them, to develop 
them, to make them capable of controlling their own 
destinies. How far she has a conscions motive one cannot 
say, but it is conccivalik; th.it she in:iy tind it to her interest 
that the Albanians should remain relatively savage, advanced 
enough to wish to be rid of the Turks, but not sufficiently 
civilised to seem capable of independence. For when the 
catastrophe comes which makes the maintenance of the 
status quo impossible, the turbulence and the backwardness 
of the Albaniaas will constitute the best arguments for an 
Austrian occupation. It will be urged with much plausi- 
bility that an autonomous Albania would be a menace to 
the peace of every State on her borders, and that the 
Albanians lack the necessary initiative for their own 
advancement The good work of Austria in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina gives an earnest of success, and unquestion- 
ably she has Uie force and the resources necessary for the 
pacification of a difficult race. Italy, on the other hand, is 
untried and without e^qserience in the management of alien 
peoples, and her best friends are those who seek to dissuade 
her from the path of Imperialism and colonial adventure. 
As for the Albanians themselves, they hardly seem to reflect 
that an Austrian occupation would mean the extinction of 
all hope of political independence. Some of them have 
thrown themselves with such whole*hearled enthusiasm 
into the language movement that they have forgotten the 
political side of nationality altogether. Others, under one 
disguise or another, have accepted bribes or subsidies from 

* Italy has also estn!>h'sher1 a chair of Albanian at Kaples» and the 
popular iiitere^t in Aibaxua i:> gruwmg. 



Digitized by Google 



284 



MACEDONIA 



Austria, and this susceptibility to the argument of die purse 
is perliaps the most distressing aspect ol the itatiooal 
character. It is no doubt a tratt of all poor peoples, and 
the Albanians share it with the Scottish Highlanders ol the 
eighteenth centoiy, to ^om they bear, in many other 
respecti^ a marked and most promising resemblance. The 
more 6ir-sighted and intelligent Albanians have adopted a 
peculiarly dangerous line of argument* They say, widi 
some justice^ that ten or twenty years of Austrian rule 
would be the salvation of the country. The Austrians 
would make roads, introduce schools^ and wean the savage 
tribesmen from their predatory habits, their feuds and their 
vendettas. But twenty years hence who would care to 
prophesy that the Austrian Empire will still exist f Those 
who reason thus know enou|^ of European politics to 
understand that a break-up of Austria is possible, and even 
probable. But they fail to realise that Austria, though she 
may be remodelled or partitioned, can hardly disappear. 
She must have ;i successor and an heir, and there is no 
guar.iiucc that aa Albanian province would be able to 
emancipate itself from one or uthcr of thij groups into 
which Austria may be split. Ma<^var or Slav or Genriaii 
rule would be even more fatal to Albanian aspirations than 
the comparatively tolerant n-gijitc of the present Empire. 

But, however strong the current may be which seems to 
be carrying Albania within the Austrian system, the 
dermination of Italy to prevent the aggrandisement of her 
rival has still to be reckoned with. To make the Adriatic 
what it was in the great days of the Venetian Republic, 
an Italian lake, is an intelligible ambition. A torpedo-boat 
can sail in three hours from Vallona to the Italian coast, 
and Italy is not at all anxious to have the Austrians in such 
close proximity. But Austria, which has no other exit from 
Fiume and Trieste, is equally resolved that Italy shall not be 
the undisputed mistress of the straits. It is fairly certain 
that either Power would go to war to prevent the other 
from acquiring so dangerous an advantage as the possession 
of the Albanian coast. One hopes that this rivalry may 
mean checkmate to the ambitions of both Powers* One 



Digitized by Google 



THE ALBANIANS 



hears, indeed, from time to time» that Italy and Austria are 
at one. It is, one suspects, the sort of unity to whidi 
Francis I. and Charles V. attained before l4via, when 
ho^ were agreed in wanting Milan. But if one chooses 

to be optimistic, there is warrant enough in official 
utterances. Addressing the Italian Chamber, after his 
meeting with Count Goluchuwski, in the summer of 1904, 
Signer Tittoni announced in categorical terms that his 
Govcriiiuent and that of Austria liad come to an under- 
standing. Both undertook to respect the status quo as 
long as possible, with the proviso that when this becomes 
impossible the solution shall be sought in an autonomy for 
Albania on national lines. Certainly there seems no other 
way of avoiding war, and with equal certainty one may 
predict that so soon as Macedonia in one way or another is 
released from direct Turkish rule, it will be quite impossible 
for the Sultan to hold Albania. The example would be too 
stimulating, the proof of Turkish weakness too over- 
whelming. Albania can be controlled more or less from 
Uskub and from Monastir, but if these centres were emanci- 
pated, she would become to all practical purposes an 
insular province, to which Constantinople could neither 
give an order nor despatch an army corps. 

Autonomy, then, is a solution within the range of practical 
politics, it is also the best solution. The Albanians have 
the makings of a united people. They are turning already 
with a pathetic eagerness towards knowledge and civilisa- 
tion. It would be difficult to allege any reason why they 
should be denied the right of self-government which has 
been allowed to Greeks and Serbs and Bulgars. They 
are certainly not more primitive, more savage, or more 
turbulent than were their neighbours the Montenegrins a 
generation ago. Austrian rule, no doutyt, would give them 
material prosperity, Init without the stimulus of freedom, 
and without the education which only independence can 
confer. Their progress would doubtless tie slow ; but they 
do not become levantinised by letters, and I bdieve that 
after a generation of schooling they would be, thanks to 
their energy and their traditions of personal honour, in 



Digitized by Google 



286 



MACEDONU 



some respects the moit promising race in the Balkan 
peninsula. For any elaborate constitutional r^gimg they 
are doubtless unfitted, but their tribal institutions rest upon 
an admirable traditional system ol local self-government 
which could be adopted without much modification* To 
select a suitable Prince would be no easy task, but when 
once he has been chosen, he will find a people whose feudal 
instincts will dispose them to honour and to obey him.' To 
introduce order and a respect lor law will no doubt be the 
worit o£ yean^ and even of generations. Wholesale coercion 
would be a fatal mistake. But it should be possible from 
the first to mark out certain areas, such as the plain of 
Koritza, together with all the larger towns, within which 
murder not be tolerated. The remoter and more 
mountainous regions can only be conquered gradually. 
But schools should be founded everywhere, and it should 
be understood that the persons of teachers must not be 
used as taigets for rifle practice. 

Higher education should be made compulsory for the 
nobility, and much might be achieved by encouraging the 
beys on one pretext or another to familiarise themselves 

' There arc already two pretenders in Uie field, (i) The Marquis 
Aladro alleges descent from the family of ScSnderbeg. He is a 

Spaniard of some diplomntic txpcricncc, wealthy and somewhat 
advanced in years. When :n\ited by a rcpn- cntative Albanian to 
submit proofs of his descent iruin Sciinderbci^ lie icphed that he had 
no sympathy with that sort of " Byzantinism. The fact seems to be 
that Ihc last mrtl!' descendant of George Castriot was kil!c<l at P.ivia. 
The Marquis Aladro can hardly be considered a serious candidate. 
His knowledge of Balkan conditions may be gauged by an offer wfaicfa 
he once tsaat to found an opera-house at Scutari I (2) The second 
claimant is a certain Prince Albert Ghica, who comes of a family 
of Albanian origin, long resident in Kouuiania. It iia^ given Hospodars 
(Governors) to the old >yallachian provinces and diplomats to the 
modern kingdom, and enjoys princely rank in the Austrian Empire. 
Prince Albert is a comparatively young man with plausible manners 
and a dubious past, who speaks fluent French, and knows neither one 
word of the Albanian language nor ttut elements of Albanian gco> 
graphy. He has been chosen honorary' president by one of the 
numerous dubs of Albanian immigrants in Bucharest, and on the 
strength ol this social honour poses in European hotels as the chief- 
clcct of the Albanian people. He talks of venturing in person into 
Albania and rai'^in? thr flao of revolt. We shall see. 

Hiii claim ii> inLciesting, only in &o far as his programme coatcm- 



Digitized by Google 



THE ALBANIANS 



^ with civilisation by travelling in Europe. The making of 
roads and the careful policing of them, by breaking down 

. the isolation d the wilder dans, should serve at once to 

« soften their manners and to create a sense of national unity. 

' The mere prohibition to cany arms would alone effect a 

1 revolution in manners. Nor should the creation of a good 
gendarmerie prove a difficult task. The fidelity of the 
Albanians ought to make them an excellent material for 
police. The chief difficulty will be financial^ since the wilder 
tribes resent direct taxationi and consume few imports on 

^ which a tarifF could be placed. The feudal structure ol 
Albanian society puts a ^powerful lever in the hands of a 

* tactful and magnetic ruler. If by means of a court and a 
coll^ he can succeed in spieading among the notnlity an 
enthusiasm for culture and for orderly progress^ the whole 
people must follow their example. 
Tlie conversion of the hmded class to Islam involved 

' the majority of the race in apostasy. A contrary move- 
ment among them towards civilisation would have results 
no less considerable. It is fairly certain, for example, that 
under a Christian Prince vast numbers of Albanians would 
return to Christiaaity— a change from which the women, at 

fitelM m mrioo of the Vladi and Alhttiifi canset. He esserti, prolNibly 

without any basis, in fact, that he has the support of the Cor;^cr\ ativc 
I party in Koumania, and mnv tbcreforc bt* backed hv the Iv Kiiiianian 

propaganda in Macedouij. ^ud Albania. His mudcbl dream a 
Vlacfao-Albanian State einl)racing all the five vU^Feli of Albania and 
Macedonia, Hut the Vlachs arc neither numerous nor warhke nor 
unammous, and they are much too cautious to rise in support ol such 
a dumera as this. As for the Albanian chieftahis. one does not see 
them accepthig the leadership of a denattonalised adventurer from 
Bucharest. 

The Khedivial family of Egypt might, if it possessed a cadet of 
character and parts, prefer a cmmi wmk some measure of reason, ina»> 

much as Mehemet Ali, tlu founder of the Hnn-c, was an Albanian 
soldier of fortune. But no member of thi^ family has so far shown 
any practical interest in Albania, or done anything to assist the national 
profiaganda. On the whole it would be best to seek a Prince from 
some rcigninj;* family of Europe. He nm^t not be a Slav, since the 
prejudice ol the Albanians against all Slavs is quite ineradicable. It 
woeld be well that be AoM not be a Catholic, since be will have so 
many Orthodox subjects who have been taught to regard the Latins 
as wot r than the 'I nrks. A Protestant woold pn^bly be the most 
generally acceptable candidate. 



Digitized by Google 



28S 



MACEDONIA 



any rate, would have much to gain. One hopes, too, that 
Bd rt ashism, relieved from the oecessity of Gonformmg 
outwardly to Islam, might develop into an independent 
cult whoK features would be humanity and tolerance. It 
is quite conceivable that this strange and gifted race, whose 
mind has so long Iain fadlowamid the loneliness of its white 
mountains, may yet contribute some new and original 
element to European civilisation. The countrymen of 
Lord Beaconsfield, on whom lies the responsibility for 
conserving Turkish rule in Europe during thirty years of 
turbulence and stagnation, could hardly discharge their 
debt to the subject races of the Balkans to better purpose 
than by assisting the Albanians in their struggle for edu- 
cation and emancipation. Something mig^t be done at 
present to aid them with schools and even, perhaps^ with 
missions, and when the catastrophe comes, to assure them 
an opportunity of woricing out their destinies in freedom.' 

• If ever an autonomous Albania comes into being the educated 
Albanians now dispersed in Roumania and Egypt, or kept in a sort of 
ofRcial imprisonment in the Turkish army or Civil Service, will un- 
doubtedly return to lead their countrymea. There are men among them 
who woold be a credit to any race. I cannot do bdtler tiian traoslata 
some passages from a letter which reached me the other day from an 
Albanian fnend, a nominal Mohamedan, wlio holds a high place in the 
Turkii>h army. As a nuhtary commaudaut in a certain gaxri^on in 
Asia Minor during the Armenian massacres, wielding large civil powers^ 
he earned golden opinions by his tolerance and his IiKn-.anity. The 
letter serves to prove how little these men, even when they are Turkish 
officials, share the attitude of the average Turk. It also shows to what 
level of culture these Albanians often manage to attain in Turkey, cut 
off thoui?'- they are from European schools, and rarely able to obtun 
any book which treats of serious topics in a modern spirit. 

"I have long waited for an opportunity dF writing to yon and ck* 
pressing myself fully and frankly on the situation and destiny of the 
people • of *he East, whom the trend of events ha^^ p!:>ccd in perpetual 
coiiili(-l, bccauic of diftercnces arising from religion, m.innci polilical 
interests, and historical tradition. They lack as yet a protector 
who should be at once liberal and strong, capabK- nf satisfying their 
national tendencies in such a way as to conciliate their bitter disseo' 
stons. The Ottoman Empire, mistaking its own int««stS| persi^ in it% 
qrstem of oppression and despotism, refractory to European advice, 
incapable of any chnnge, by reason of its ingrained vices, ^ociil and 
political. For the moment it seems incapable of preserving its mtegritv 
or of conforming itself to the demands of modem prindpies. It 
prefers to submit to serious measures of intervention which wound 
tts dignity, rather tUaa adopt of its own free wili» reforms which are 



THE ALBANIANS 



289 



ncccssaqr at much fdr its own Ktf^ p r Mam Uoa as lor the happioMS 

ol its conquered peoples, 

*' The Aibaniau^ Christians as well as Moslems, have for centuries 
sbed their blood for the honom* of the Empire— 4he Cathofic moon- 
taineers have always fought under the standards oi Hhm own chiefs 
against the Russians, the Serbs, and the Montenegrins, and the military 
history of the Empire is full ot' examples cf the ho'oism ot these bra.ve 
soldiers. But by way of reoompense for flieee aenrioes the Empire 
has decreed the suppression, by the most Byzantine of methods, of the 
cultivation of their language, the first of the intellectual rights of man. 
You teU me that you wiU endeavour to create aa interest in the 
Albaaiaa avestion in England. In ttiat way, my dear friend, you will 
perform a humanitarian work. The gcncr il prosperity depends on the 
enfranchisement of every branch of the hmnau family. Those who are 
at the head of dviliaatioii are in dttty bound to soccoor their badtward 
brethren. Truth will emerge from the ocean of mystery only through 
the liiL:ti(«;t development of the greatest number. Above all, the 
uiihap^rv Albanians are the elder sons of the European family. The 
r^ark»ble affinity of Hht A^antan language to Suucrit proves them 
to be t!i( earliest emigrants of the Aryan race who settled in Kurope. 
The descendants of tne ancient Pelasgians are not lacking in intelli- 
nnoe, in bravery, in force and independence of character, and thoug^ 
Isisun has conquered Albania, their morals have remained intact. Their 
COnvtTsion to Islam has onlv changed their belief, from a fnith in the 
Trinity to a belief in the unity oi (iod, but the vices of Islam, polygamy 
and slavery, have never infeded ttie Albanians. The Ottoman conquest 
has been able neither to enslave nor to corrupt their indomitable temper. 

"To raise themselves to the level of their European brethren, the 
Albanians need nothing but tlie ligiii of modern science. The right of 
cultivating their language will be the gage of their enfranchisement. 
English diplomacy, by assisting the Albanians in this legitimate direc- 
tion, would accomplish a service worthy of its renown and of its 
reputation lor disinterested philanthropy. The Albanians are genereos 
enough to be eternally grateful to their benefactor. By the enfran- 
chi'^t ment of the Albaninns English poUcv m5?^ht put an end to the 
intei miuable compUcatioas of the East. The Albanians are moderate 
enough not to put forward exa^;erated pretensions like those of the 
Greeks and the Btilsartans. England, by using her influence on behalf 
of the autonomy of Albania, would increase her predominance in the 
balance of power in the Balkans, She would gain for ever an element 
faithful to hec policy, and, to speak more precisely, a vangoard gainst 
the dangerous mx'asion of Panslavism in the East. We are not Opposed 
to the enfranchisement of our neighbours of otho: races, bot at the 
same time we wish to preserve onr natural frontiers. Greece has foond 
her natural limit towards the North. " Old Servia " is nothing but an 
historical term, a mcmoiy of the ephemeral reign of the Servian 
Emperors. Montenegro li^ already seued several Albanian districts. 
Macedonia, within its proper lintln, oo^t to have a cobmopolitan 
autonomy, neutral and subject to Europe in rontrcM, ^iIK•e it tlocs not 
po:»&ess a distinctive national character — all the races of the baikans are 
mixed there pell-mell. As for the Sultan, be most be contented with 
the sort of nominal suzerainty to which he is alrouiy accustomed. He 
can find in Asia concubines and flatterers and WfiM enongh to dassle 
with a display of his legendary ^eatn^ss,** 

U 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTBR IX 



THE PROBLBM OP REFORM 

JT was towards the close of the year 1903 \bak European 
diplomacy rediscovered the Macedonian question. 
General TzoncheflTs incursion over the Bulgarian frontier, 
followed as it was by an outburst of official ferocity and the 
flight of some thousands of peasants, was certainly an 
agitating incident. It is not probable that diplomacy was 
greatly exercised over the f ile of the peasants whose homes 
had bt'L-n burned ; tJie disturbing thing was the proof it 
aifoided tiiat the Macedonian Lulgar liad at lingth been 
educated and organised to a point at which he fch himself 
capable of fightinfj for his liberty. It is always at this point 
that enslaved populations begin to interest diplomacy. So 
long as they can only bend their backs to the lash they 
cause no disquietude and excite no concern. What hap- 
pened on a small scale in autumn might well repeat itself 
on a large scale in spring, and a Macedonian revolt, fostered 
by Bulgarian sympathy, mij^ht end by provoking a wnr 
between Turkey and the vassal Principality, and this, in it> 
turn, might involve the European Powers. Tliere was for 
a time considerable stir in the Embassies. The facts were 
investigated and chronicled ; the refugees were relieved ; 
the semi-official press of Russia and Austria began to talk 
of the duty of forestalling events, and suddenly in December 
Count Lamsdorf visited Vienna. Russia was of the 
two Powers the more alert and enterprising. She had 
just been celebrating^ the twcntv-hfth anniversary of the 
War of Liberation by a demonstration in the Shipka Pass, 
at which an imposing imperial deputation joined hands 



Digitized by GoogI 



THE PROBLEM OF REFORM 191 



with the Russophii Bolgarian Gavemnaent of the day> while 
the aged General Ignatieff was allowed to deliver a speech 
which revived the Panslavist watchwords of an earlier 
generation* The fraternisation in the Shipka Pass was 
followed by a further devdopment. Madame Bakmetieff, 
the clever American wife of tiie Russian Diplomatic Agent 
in Sofia, organised the relief of the Macedonian fugitives 
who wintered in Bulgaria^ and under the influence of 
reports of atrodtiesi which certainly did not err on the 
side of moderation^ the Russian press began to concern 
itself once more with the affairs of its enslaved race-fellows 
in Turkey. The probabilities are that it was an artificial 
movement, for when Bulgaria got rid of the Russophil 
Daneff Cabinet, and installed a nationalist (Stambulofist) 
Government in its place, and the Macedonian Bulgars 
made their revolt without waiting for the word of order 
from St. Petersburg, a sudden chill overtook charitable 
hearts in Russia, and the rouble played no part in 
succouring the villagers of the devastated Monastir region. 

These signs of the times were not lost upon the Sultan. 
It seemed as though Russian intci cst la the Balkans was 
awakcniML;, and ui the hope of avertmg intervention he 
declared Ins purpose oi mtroducing spontaneous reforms. 
In December, 1902, he promulgated his own reform pro- 
gramme. It contained one clause of importance — that 
which appointed Hussein Hilmi Pasha to the post of 
Inspector-General of the three Macedonian vilayets. 
Meanwhile Count Lamsdorf was elaborating the first 
Austro-Russian scheme at Vienna, and the assent of the 
other European Power'^ was readily obtained. The scheme 
itself was feeble aiici halt-hearted. It remained a dead 
letter. It was obliterated by the insurrection of August, 
1903, and superseded by the Miirzsteg progranune. But it 
embodied one prniciple of vital and enduring importance. 
It recognised the right of Austria and Russia as the two 
" interested " Powers, to devise a scheme of reform and to 
superintend its execution. Their consular staffs acquired a 
privileged position, and exercised a sort of nominal control, 
ineffective indeed, but none the less sufficient to ensure 



Digitized by Google 



MACEDONIA 



them precedence over the representatives of the Western 
Powers. This meant that four of the six Powers which 
signed the Treaty of Berhn abdicated their responsibilities 
and their rights. To be sure it was carefully explained 
that Austria and Russia were only the *' mandatories " of 
Europe, which controlled their action and invested them 
with its authority lor a specific and limited purpose. 
But such formal reservations are apt to be ignored in 
practice. Nothing that has happened since the granting 
of this mandate is to be compared with it in importance. 
In a moment of haste and levity the Western Powers 
declared in efft ci that since they are disinterested they are 
also indifferent. Public opinion in England and France 
was iininstructed and unorganised. France was glad to 
oblige her ally ; official England under Mr. Balfour 
felt no anxiety to make ber moral influence felt. The 
fatal mandate was given, and looking calmly at the forces 
involved, I see small hope that it will ever be completely 
withdrawn. Between the formulation of the first and 
second Austro-Russian sdiemes the humane parties in 
England, Prance and Italy marshalled their rainksy con* 
certed their action and shaped their demands. They 
insisted that the fate of Macedonia was a European con- 
cern, and intervention a European duty. They protested 
against the abandonment of its struggling races to the cold 
patronage of two selfish and interested guardians. They 
formulated a plan for an international control with a 
European Governor as the source of authority. But, deqjite 
the adherence of Lord Lansdowne to this proposal, the 
second reform scheme repeated with some modifications 
the essential features of the first, in so far as it recognised 
the principle of the dual control. Later, as the war in the 
Far East and the constitutional movement at home demon* 
strated the utter incapacity of Russia to carry out her 
mission in the Balkan peninsula, a fresh opportunity arose 
of revisinj^ her mandate. There was truth in the argument 
that two i^owers, if tliL*y were unanimous, sincere, and well 
intcntioncd, ii)r:;lit achieve more in the way of far-rcaclnng 
reform and vigilant control than the cumbcidoiue machinery 



Digitized by Go 



THE PROBLEM OF REFORM 293 



of tbe Conoert. Events have proved lliat Austria and 
Rossia are slow, apathetic, and irresolute. They care only 
for their own Imperial interests, and one member of the 
partnership has lost her prestige and her freedom of action. 
No sincere mind can suppose that Russia, incapable of 
setting her own house in order, bankrupt, defeated, and 
preoccupied, can spare the energy or command the authority 
necessary for a reforming mission in Turkey. The Grand 
Ducal cHque is absorbed in anxieties more intimate than 
the anarchy in Macedonia, liui despite a renewed attempt 
by Lurd L.iui>Jowne, undertaken very quietly in January, 
1905, to place the Western Powers on terms of equality 
with Austria and Russia, the mandate of 1902 is still 
formally valid, and has even been renewed. 1 1 is obvious that 
England, Italy, and unofficial France are aware of the fatal 
error they committed in a moment of apathy, but their 
concern, though real, is not sufBciently keen to overcome 
the interested obstinacy of the two Eastern Empires. 

The claims of Austria and Russia to a privileged position 
in Macedonia rest on very diverse gromids. Of the two 
Powers, Austria has, I think, the sounder pretension. At 
least she has a large material stake in the country. The 
railroads are mainly Austrian concerns, although it cannot 
he said that their prosperity is serionslv affected by the dis- 
order winch prevails under Turkish rule. Their profits are 
independent of their earnings, since they are derived from 
a kilometric guarantee which is secured by the tithes. But 
the trade of Salonica and IJskub is very largely in Austrian 
hands.' One meets commercial travellers from Budapest 
in Macedonian inns. The local Jews, who largely control 
the business of Salonica, readily enter into relations with 
their co-religionists in Hungary and Austria, and un- 
doubtedly this considerable and beneficial intercourse is 
threatened by disorder, as it would be expanded by good 
^vemment. Salonica is connected by direct railway with 
Vienna, and by the Lloyd steamships with Trieste, and 
there is no gainsaying the fact that Macedonia might be, 

* One ought not to forget, however, that 6o per cent of the ionign 
trade of liacodonia it MKi to be Brttith. 



Digitized by Google 



294 



MACEDONIA 



under happier conditiooSy an important market for Austrian 
produce. There are small colonies of Austrian subjects in 
Uskub and Salonica ; and the railway employ^ tbou^ 
many of them are Greeks and some Italians, are on the 
whole to be reckoned as the pioneers of Austrian influence. 
The consulates are well staffed and filled for the most part 
with men of energy and ability. It would be difficult, 
however^ to say with any precision what Austrian policy in 
Macedonia really is. It is easy, of course, to accept the 
current su^idon and to believe that Aushm is stealthily 
but actively preparing for the occupation of the western 
half of Macedonia. The Bulgarians undoubtedly believe 
this, and the prospect fills them with grave alarm. I have 
no doubt that the more ambitious of the younger men in 
the consular and diplomatic services cherish saich schemes. 
It is even hinted that they sometimes go so far as to 
encourage the insurgent element, with the idea of provoking 
complications serious enough to warrant the armed inter- 
vention of Austria. There is a whole ingenious l^end, 
which it might be rash to dismiss as quite baseless, which 
links both Austria and Germany in an elaborate plot to 
seize Macedonia. Germany, it is said, aims at appropriating 
the purely German provinces of Austria proper, and en* 
courages Austria to compensate herself by absorbing the 
Slavonic elements of the Balkans. I have even been assured, 
by a gentleman who was a member of a Bulgarian Cabinet 
in 1897, that overtures were made to his Government 
throu^ a German diplomatic agent, sugg^ting a partition 
of Macedonia. The portion to the west of the Vardar 
Valley was to go to Austria, that to the east to be annexed 
by Bulgaria. I can give no reason for my scepticism, and 
yet I distrust this story — at least in this definite form. That 
individuals cherish such projects is doubtless true. But 
the whole policy of Austria betrays an irresolution incom- 
patible with any conscious and determined policy of an- 
nexation. The aged Emperor is averse from adventure. 
Neither the Germans nor the Magyars are anxious to 
increase the Slavonic population, and the clericals arc 
probably uawiihug to add to llic Oi ihodox element in the 



1 



THE PROBLEM OF REFORM 295 

Empire. Moreover, the military position of Austria is 
unfavourable. The railway is hers, but the railway passes 
through Servia. Nor could she easily advance from Bosnia 
along the Mitrovitza*Uslnib line, lor Montenegro and Servia 
would menace her flanks, and the Albanians are not to be 
relied upon to assist her. At sea she is neutralised by Italy, 
which would certainly resent an attempt to land an Austrian 
army of occupation at Salonica* Some acute minds sus- 
pect that she has intentionally put forward futile reform 
schemes, well knowing that they would fail, with the idea 
that their failure would make an occupation inevitable. 
But it is quite as probable that her policy is merely hesi- 
tating and weak because it ;s ciiulious and consei valive. 
She does not wish to encourui^e revolution. She dreads 
any inconsiderate vigour which might conceivably provoke 
an armed conflict. She temporises, plays with reform, and 
endeavours to stave off a crisis, precisely as all bureaucracies 
do within their own territories when confronted by a 
demand for reform which they hardly understand. It is 
weak and culpable conduct, but it may be sincere. The 
most plausible theory is that Austria has no fixed and 
official policy at all in Macedonia. There is no doubt that 
she aims at absorbint^ Albania. If opportunity favoured, 
she would possibly be equally glad to extend her sphere of 
intiuence to Western Macedonia, but I doubt if there is 
evidence for suspecting the Foreign Otiice, as distinct from 
some of its more enert^otic agents, of working actively in 
favour of any design so considerable. For it is, after ail, 
no mean ambition. The port of Salonica would be a great 
acquisition to a Power which is almost land-locked. As a 
commercial harbour it lias incontestable advantages over 
Trieste and Fiume. It was made to be the busy (Up6t of 
a great civilisation, and even the Turks have hardly been 
able to destroy its natural advantages. Under any civilised 
administration it would soon rival Marseilles. As a naval 
centre it would be even more invaluable to Austria, for it 
lies beyond the Italian sphere of influence, and its value 
could not be affected by a blockade which would close the 
mouth of the Adriatic It might easily be made the great 



Digitized by Google 



296 



MACEDONIA 



port for the trade between Asia and Contiiiental Europe 
and raise Austria to the level of a great marittme Power 
and the mistress of the Levant. All this is ver^' clear, and 
one cannot wonder that the dream of acquiring Salonica 
floats before the imagination of Austrian patriots. But the 
route between Salonica and Vienna lies through Belgrade, 
and the Power which intends to acquire and utilise Salonica 
must absorb and conquer not merely Macedonia^ but Servia 
as well. While King Milan lived, that might have been 
easy — he often dreamed of entering the Austrian Empire 
as a sort of feudatory vassal — ^but even if the Servians were 
incapable of serious resbtance» the Concert might have 
something to say to so drastic a remodelling of the map of 
Europe. It is the fashion to talk of the humble peasants 
who are struggling for some poor measure of liberty in 
Macedonia as a subvernve and revolutionary element 
They deserve the term far less than the Austrian Im- 
perialists who entertain such schemes as this. But it must 
be confessed that Austria does not give evidence of the 
vigour and unanimity necessary for the realisation of such 
a programme. Each race within her borders has its own 
egoistic schemes. There are Germans and Czechs, Mag* 
yars and Croats* But there are no Austrians^ save, perhaps, 
a handful of bureaucrats in the diplomatic service. These 
men may cherish their ambitions of expansion and con- 
quest. But it takes a people to make an Empire. 

Of Russian policy it is equally difficult to write with 
assurance. For who makes Russia's policy ? To answer 
the question would be to disentangle the intimate and 
complicated relations between the Taar, the Grand Dukes, 
and the several ministries. It is a habit with a certain 
English school to talk as tibough Russia were a single entity 
which cherishes long views and works with amazing cun- 
ning and competence towards their realisation. The odd 
thing is that Russia entertains precisely the same delusion 
about us. It is merely a prejudice and an exaggeration 
which has grown up in the course of a long and bitter 
rivalry. Some of the Russian agents in Macedonia and the 
Balkan peninsula generally, undoubtedly seemed to be men 



Digitized by 



THE PROBLEM OF REFORM 19? 



of 3U1 active and enterprising temper, who would gladiy 
have favoured a policy of aggrandtsemeot and intrigue. 
The war has tauglit us that the bureaucracy imposes only 
the slackest discipline upon its agents. If one were to 
judge Russian policy by the attitude^of her consuls, one 
would certainly arrive at the conclusion reached by the 
Greeks, that Russia still fiamurs the Bulgarians, subsidises 
the revolutionary Committee, ferments insunection, and 
aims at consolidating her position in Turkey by using her 
kinship with the load Slavs to crush all other elements of 
the population. The Turks will add that she is steadily 
working to undermine their prestige and corrupt their 
integrity by every form of moral and political humiliation 
which an unscrupulous foe can devise. Such is the popular 
view in the Balkans, and, if one accepts the purely local 
standpoint it is the natural and inevitable view.' When 
we turn, however, to what is generally known about the 
public attitude of the Russian Government, the facts tell a 
diametrically opposite tale. It may be undermining Turkish 
authority, tmt its influence has been supreme in Constanti- 
nople ever since 2890, when En^isfa iprestige began to 
wane. It certainly stood tiy the Sultan during the Ar- 
menian butcheries. Towards Bulgaria it has been cold, 
and at times hostile, since the coup if Hat of 1885, when 
Eastern Roumelia was added to Bulgaria proper, and the 

' The popular view of the Balkans is, of course, no evidence at all. 

In that atmosphere of intrigue and duplicity the lightest '^n-^picion at 
once passes current as fact, and no native is so poor-spirited as to 
criticue evidence. The Greeks treat the statement that the Rusnan 
Governmeiit subsidises the Balgaiian Committees as a proposition 
which requires no demonstration. But the same Greek journalists 
who advance this cliargc also profess to belMve that the English Relief 
Pmid was spent in financing rebellion t An Albanian agitator of tome 
experience once assured nu tn.it he knew for i fact that Boris SarafofiF 
had received a vast sum (naminjr the amount) from St. FelcrsfMirg, He 
went on to add that the English Balkan Committee liad given him 
j(50k000 1 The first statement, I fancy, deserves no more CTOdit than 
the second. I once distrilmted a few hundred pounds to some famine- 
stricken viUages in Crete^ which were sent to me from the late Duke of 
Westminster^ fund. I hxppentd to be on terms of personal friendship 
with one or two of the Russian naval officers at Canea. It was at once 
assumed that I was a Russian agent, and that the mooegf came from 
Russia i On such t»ses are Balkan politics built 



Digitized by Google 



MACEDONIA 



Russian othcers who were training the Bulgarian army left 
it in the Kirch to face Servia alone. It is true that the 
relationship is apt to grow more cordial when a Russophi! 
Ministry comes into power at Sofia. The Tsar stood god- 
father to little Prince Boris, and there was a flicker of the 
old fraternal sentiment during the celebrations in 1902 at 
the Shipka Pass. But in general Russia has been at no 
pains to conceal her chagrin. When she created a free 
Bulgaria, she doubtless intended that it should be a mere 
vassal of her own Empire. She did not foresee the growth 
of a strong independent State She accuses Bulgaria of 
ingiatitude. She detests her radical and {progressive ten- 
dencies. She realises that Bulgaria belongis in spirit to the 
West, and that the reactionary traditions of M. Pobie- 
donostseif's Empire* have as little attraction for her as 
for any of the n on Slavonic peoples of the Balkans. Time 
was when the Greeks, because they were Orthodox, were 
the favoured proiigjb of Russia. The Bulgarians succeeded 
them in her favour, and now they in turn have proved 
themselves unworthy of her patronage* The result is that 
the ideal of a hree and autonomous Macedonia no longer 
attracts her. She was willing enough to liberate Macedonia 
in 1878 when she supposed that a Great Bulgaria, stretdiing 
from the Danube to the .^E^^an, would be a mere vestibule 
of the Russian Empire. To-day she hesitates, for she has 
no guarantee that a free Macedonia would serve her political 
ends. Nothing, indeed, is more curious than the way in 
which Russia and England have exchanged r$les since 1878. 
Then Disraeli opposed the liberation of Macedonia because 
he feared that a Great Bulgaria would strengthen Russa's 
power in the Balkans. To-day Lord Lansdowne supports 
the programme of autonomy and liberation because he 
knows that the complete emancipation of the Bulgarian 
race would erect a permanent barrier against Russian 
aggression. This reversal of policy had ^en place as 
early as 1885, when Extern Roumelia achieved her union 
vwth Bulgaria. England warmly supported the change ; 

» This was witten before Count Witte's coining to power. I am not 
sure that it is yet oat of date. 



Digitized by 



THE PROBLEM OF REFORM 



Russia urg^ Abdul Hainid to reduce the rebel province 
by force of arms. The Bulg^uians haire not forgotten the 
conduct of their late liberator in that crisis. No doubt 
Russia is unwilling to abandon altogether her Panslavist 
traditions.' She still whispers in Sofi% A day will come." 
She still protects the Bulgauian Church, whidi die created. 
It is possible that her agents at times extend a dubious and 
furtive encouragement to the revolutionary Committees, 
and certainly they are often ready to rescue suspected 
insurgents from prison and exile. But her real policy is 
probably her public policy. She is doubtless sincere when 
she denounces the revolutionary organisations as subversive 
and criminal elements, and in her official communique 
throws upon them the whole responsibility for the anarchy 
of Macedonia. \ consistent despotism could ttikc no other 
view. It cannot with sutcty be liberal abroad and reac- 
tionary at home. There is an inform:il Holy Alliance, in 
which Sultan, Kaiser, ;ind Tsar make common cause against 
any i^roiip ui mcii who are struggling for freedom. There 
is too much in common between the Macedonian insurgent 
and the Russian terrorist for a modern Tsar to encourage 
the one while he dreads the other. And so it happened 
thai when in 1902 it became clear that sumclhing must be 
done to avert insurrection and stave off war, Russia joim-d 
with Austria in proposing the barest minimum of retoim. 
Both Powers probably foresaw that their prescriptions 
would fail. They took care to inauc^iirate a form of inter- 
vention which could not lead to autonomy, while it might 
easily pave the way for a jomt occupation. In 1876, during 
a i^raver but somewhat similar crisis, Russia proposed a 
scheme of local autonomy for the various Slavonic pro- 
vinces. In 1902 lit r scheme was an Austro-Russian control. 
It is obvious that when the day arrives for her to claim her 
inheritance in Turkey, she will not attempt to instal a native 

» Since the close of the Japanese War the Moscow Panslavist Loajjue, 
which used to be under the patronage of the late Grand Duke Serge, 
and is now eontroUed by one of his craatorea, M. Tcherep Spiridovitcli, 
has shown si^ns of rcneiied actlfitjr^ and Is ODCO iDoro tofiilng its 
atteatioa to the Balkans. 



I 



Digitized by Google 



MACEDONIA 



tenant She will manage the estate herself. But it is no 
less dear that it was not part of her plan to precipitate an 
immediate crisis. The Japanese War was alresidy casting its 
shadow over her path, ^e intended to procrastinate and 
gain time, to secure a recognition of her rig^t of intervene 
tion but not to exercise it, to substitute one futile sdieme of 
reform for another, and to make good her claim at law 
while postponing to her own convenience the moment for 
enforcing it. 

It is necessary to ^ive here some account ot the use 
which RubMa and Austria have made ol liicir mandate, if 
only because the outlines of their reform schemes are hkely 
to serve in some sort as a basis for future reforms. 

The earlier scheme came into force in February, 1903, as 
a sort of refinement and amplification of the reforms whicii 
the Sultan had drafted spontaneously in December, 1902. 
The pivot of the new plan was the Inspector-General, 
Hussein Hiiuii Paslia, who was supposed to be " con- 
trolled," wherever he might happen to be, by the local 
Austrian and Russian consuls, Hilmi Pasha is cert:^inlv a 
m:m of rather exceptional ability, with much more culture 
than 1- common among Ottoman officials. He has read a 
little, and speaks French well. But he has never been out 
of Turkey in his life, and his ideals, for all his superficial 
education, are simply those of the Hamidian court. He 
had been Governor of the Yemen, and was, I fancy, a 
trusted ''Palace" man. Certainly there is a ring in his 
deep and musical voice when he speaks of his Imperial 
master, which suggests that he may be among those who 
have been hypnotised by the singular personal chaim which 
all unprejudiced witnesses ascribe to Abdul Hamid. Hilmi 
Pasha has something of the same magnetism. His manner 
is grave, courteous, and distinguished. He suggests the 
Arab rather than the Turk. One's first impression is that 
he is profoundly sincere and completely honest His 
optimism is contagious, and one experiences in his 
presence that rarest of all emotions in the East— a thrill 
of hope. Further acquaintance modifies the impression* 
and one realises that one has to deal with the first 



Digitized by Google 



THE PROBLEM OF REFORM 301 

comedian of Europe. But the process of being deceived 
is still agreeable. It is a >pccies of flattery, and it is hard to 
led indignant with a performer so finished and so graceful. 
Besides, the man is nn indefatigable worker, always at his 
desk, always with some paper in his hand, always accessible, 
and ever ready to extend his working day far into the small 
hours of the morning. It is the method rather than the 
will which is at fault. The whole conception of reform in 
Hilmi Pasha's mind^ is the production of results on paper 
which will impress his constant visitors, the consuls, and 
figure ultimately in some official report which will confound 
Europe with the amazing progress of Macedonia under his 
paternal sway. I can quite believe that he deceives himself. 
He is an incorrigible bureaucrat, who spends his days in a 
haze of tobacco smoke with telegrams and statistics as the 
only realities before him. He rarely quits his audience- 
chamber and then only to pay formal o^lh on consuls, and 
I should doubt whether he has ever had the curiosity since 
his arrival in Macedonia to visit a sing^i one of the villages 
which he governs^ or to converse with a single representative 
of the two million peasants whose fate depends upon his 
telegrams and his edicts* One can handle statistics without 
touching fact. 1 shall not readily forget my first interview 
with him in May, 1903, when with pardonable pride he read 
me his report upon the progress of his reforms. He boasted 
that over a thousand brigands had been arrested since his 
arrival in Macedonia— indeed, nearly all of them had 
voluntarily surrendered. It was a proof of energy. Ten 
minutes later he assuced me that a thousand penitent 
offenders had been released from prison. It was a proof of 
clemency. Away from the magnetic presence, it dawned 
upon me that the figures tallied oddly. The brigands in 
league with the gendarmes had simply walked in at one 
door of the gaol to the glory of Abdul llainid and out at 
the other. But the figures were there. The reforms had 
been accomphshed, and on any sceptic Hilmi Pasha would 
smile blandly and meet his objections (as he answered mine 
when I told him that everywhere the peasants were so 
tcrriiied tiiat they dare not come to markci), wuii a magmii- 



Digitized by Google 



302 



MACEDONIA 



cent gesture and a scmoroos and oondnsiYe ^ Ordoe i Dien 
la tranquillity i^gne partont/' 

In effect I think Ifae appointment of Hilmi Pseha was 
actually mischievoas* It mailed a further stage in ttie 
insane centralisation of the Turkish system. Instead of 
dealing as before with three Valis among whom there 
might chance to bt one honest and independent person- 
ality, the Palace need now reckon only with the Inspector- 
General. At the same time the task of eqsionage was 
rendered easier and the consequent confusion more com* 
plete. The Valis^ jealous of Hilmt Pasha, ignored him and 
corresponded directly with Constantinople. The minor 
prefects and governors (caimakams and mutcssarifs)^ instead 
of reporting through the Valis, were in direct relations with 
lliluii I'asha. Hl- liim^bclf was iurrounclL'ii wilh spies, and 
the military commanders were peculi irlv anxious to restrict 
his authority. It is the sort of complicated and superfluous 
muddle which allows the Sultan to feel absolutely secure. 
Hilmi Pasha, however, cannot be ubiquitous. He spends 
his time between Uskub, Salon ica, and Monastir, passing, 
as a rule, three or four months in each of these great 
adniuiistrative centres. His arrival virtually deposes the 
local Vali, who sulks, or plays chess, or goes ofl" to harry 
the Albanians, while Hilmi Pasha and all the troupe of the 
travelling reform company occupy the stage and overhaul 
the stock properties. For a brief season the administrative 
machine works at hicjh pressure. The unhappy telegraph 
clerks forget the meaning of sleep, and all the penmen of 
the administration are set to compile statistics and draft 
reports for the consuls. The police, the prefects, the 
revenue officers, the civil and ecclesiastical judges, hurry 
to the room where careers are made, and for three months 
the Vali is the only idle official in all tlie vilayet But at 
length the strain is relaxed and the restless reformer betakes 
himself to another sphere of action. The Vali begins once 
more to frequent his office. The telegraph clerks enjoy 
their slumbers, and the traditional Turkish motto, Yavash 
Yavash/' which may be roughly rendered, "Ca' canny/' 
breathes repose where all was agitation. An abnormal 



Digitized by Google 



THE PROBLEM OF REFORM 303 



slackness succeeds to an unwonted stir.< The discredited 
Vali has no autbority or prestige left to enforce even a 
moderate standard of energy, and in a very few days the 
state of the reformed province is worse than before. Bat 
the statistics and the reports are still in evidence. Who 
shall doubt that the enervated and demoralised admini- 
stration has been thorougiiiy l eiurmed ? Littera scripta 
maneL 

The outline of the reforms which were attempted, 
both on the initiative of the Sultan, and of the two 
interested Powers, during the year 1903 must be briefly 
sketched — it never was more than an outline, (i) The 
finances were supposed to be placed in some mys tenons 
way under the jurisdiction of the Imperial Ottoman 
Bank — an international mstitution controlled mamiy l)V 
French capital. It opened new branches in Uskub and 
Monastir, and it was supposed to act as paymaster and 
treasurer. But it had no powers of control. It banked 
the $upplies-*if any^-confided to it, and paid without 
question the sums demanded of it. (2) The civil and 
criminal courts were reorganised on an ambitious scale. 
The number of professional judges was increased, and their 
nominal salaries raised— a reform which cost nothing. This 
was actually a reactionary step. Under the old system the 
civil tribunals were tartly composed of elective membersi 
local notables chosen by tiie various religious communities 
of the chief towns-— Turks, Greeks, Bulgarians, and Jews. 
They were not trained lawyers, but they were usually men 
of substance and reputation, who were not compelled to 
live by bribes, and they were amenable to public opinion. 
Their fault was not so much venality as timidity. They 
dared not assert themselves ag^nst the executive officials. 
To substitute for these men a hungry crowd of unpaid 
professional Levantine lawyers who are vena! as well as 
timid, was a very doubtful " reform." (3) There was much 

' I am far from implying that the sbdmcst ia worsethan fha stir. I, 

for example, was beset with spies and escorts as long as Hilmi Pasha 
remained in Monastir. As sooa as he departed I was allowed to ride 
abouti a free man. 



304 



NfACEDONIA 



I 



arimtftud fft thft ranbt. but the officcra. aa hcfore. t»m aU of 
them Moslem s. These new recruits were drawn Irom the 
lowest andTmost abject class of the population ; tiiey were 
rarely, if ever, Bulgianans, and they were emplo3fed only in 
menkd dttties. At the same time a few Swc- lish and I ^ l^i an 

TIm^v V to yf^W paiH, ^nA luxwnZ r,( »h<mi »Ar> ^tAly «ir%aH^ 4/% 

UiKlcibl iiid tha t th eir f^^ f "u!!LrTr,!!w»"r ' 

(4) Great importance was claimed for a drastic ret rm 

a ffecting th e nn-.il yii.il d. (if llu' vill.i^rs— llic .l. ill c}- 

are called — ^retired brigands most of them, who prey upon th e 

C hristian ptr^^^'^' '" '^^^ In iii^ an intimate domestic tyran ny 
i nto their daily lives (see pp. 47-48). It was agreed that 
Christian villages instead of having to endure Mosle m 
^uards might elect Christians . B ut two reservations su f- 
fi rpd to ro ndi^r thm privile|ie \vnt-thlt'_>^^. I n the first p|n ce 
on ly landowners had the right to vote, so that vill age.^ 
w hich formed part of the estate of a Moslem bey \\ e re ' 
n o better oii than before . I n the second place the Christi an ' 
t^ uards were not allowed to possess rifles . They wore their 
little badges, but t heir only arms were a cudgel or ij i_aQIpe . 
cases a fowling-p iece. When the first bashi-bazouk with 
a rifle appeared on the scene, the only course open to the 
Christian rural guard was to hide in the nearest haystack. 
Moreover, by nominating a Christian bekchi the village did | 
not necessarily get rid of its old tyrant. He handed over 
his badge and his title to a Christian underling, but he kept 
his rifle and drew his pay and indulged in his ravages as 
before. Such were the reforms in their first stage. Their 
uselessness merely served to encourage the insurgents in 
the belief that freedom could only be won by force of 
arms. Uilmi Pasha's real occupation during the first seven 
months of his tenure of office was not reform but repres- 
sion. The insurrection of August was the fruit of his 
activity. 

In September, 1903, the Emperor and the Tsar met at the 



Digitized by Google 



THE PROBLEM OF REFORM 305 



hunting-lodge of Murzsteg, near Vienna, and the second 
Au^tro-Russian Reform Scheme was the result of their 
deliberations. Six montlis of procrastination followed, and 
it was not until April, 1904, that it came fully into operation 
in Macedonia. Its resulte have been as disappointing as 
those of the first essay in amelioration. The state of Mace- 
donia is if anything worse than it was in 1902. Something, 
however, has been gained. A further blow has been struck 
at the direct sovereignty of the Turks ; and though the 
principle of an exclusive Austro-Russian control remains 
intact, some place has been found in the new scheme for 
the other Powers. It maloes an advance towards the ideal 
of an international protectorate. 

The first draft of the MQr»teg scheme was a large and 
ambitious charter, of reforms, (i) The liiain point was the 
nomination of two Civil Assessors representing Austria and 
Russia, who were to sit, as it were, at the right and the left 
of Hihni Pasha and guide htm in the straight path. Un- 
fortunately their powers are purely advisory. They may 
investigate abuses through their travelling secretaries, they 
may demand redress, and they may suggest improvements. 
But it is open to Hilmi Pasha to refer any and every matter 
in dispute between himself and his two advisers to Con- 
stantinople. He is the mere shadow of the Palace, and 
they are only the eyes of the Embassies. In short, there 
has been no decentralisation, and the Palace, checked to 
some sliglit extent by the Embassies, is still supreme in 
Macedonia. The Civil Assessors arc merely glurilied 
consuls, With higher rank but no ampler powers. Tlie 
sole result of their presence in Macedonia is that their 
Governments have more detailed and authoritative reports 
of the old anarchy, the habitual corruption, and the in- 
curable stagnation of Turki-li rule. 

(2) A rearrangement of adiiiini<trative areas was promised, 
doubtless with the object of disentang!inf» the rival races 
whom the Turks h^ve sedulously conttninclcd, Nothin;^ 
has been done to give ehect to this, beyond the exclusion ot 
the purely Greek and Albanian districts from the scope of 
the reforms. Old Servia, Elbasan, Koritza, and Selhdje are 



DigitizecUay Google 



3o6 MACEDONIA 

left imtoudied by any European control^ thus leaving within 
the area of reform a Macedonia practically identical with 
that of the Treaty of San Stefano, and for the most part 
Slavonic But the old boundariea of the vilayets remain 
unaltered. 

(3} There has been an experiment of doubtful value in 
the direction of better taxation. For the first year (1904) 
two small groups of villages in the Monastir vilayet have 
had their tithes collected, either directly from the peasants 
or indirectly through the landlords, but witiiout the in- 
tervention of tax-farmers. As yet, however, there is no 
evidence that this experiment will be generally adopted, 
aad it hiis been extended for a second year (1905) only to 
three cazas. It leaves the landowners with all their old 
powers. 

(4) For two years no attempt was made to reorganise the 
finances, but at the moment of wriiiiig the Powers are 
engaged in imposing a system of international control upon 
the Porte. 

(5) The reorganisation of the courts of justice is 
promised, but nothing lias yet been attempted, or even 

proposed. 

it is only (6) in the reorganisation of the (^endnm ;. i le 
that any progress has been made, and even liere the gain 
is rather in the recoi^iulion of principles than in the achieve- 
ment of actual results. The discussion of the basis of the pro- 
posed reform of the gendarmerie occupied six weary months, 
during which the Turks resisted and fought for time, 
while only the British Ambassador exhibited any particular 
eagerness for a satisfactory outcome. It was decided that the 
new gendarmerie should be the nucleus of an international 
force. Austria and Russia enjoy no special privileges. 
The Commander is the Italian General de Giorgis, but, 
unfortunately, his authority was surrendered from the 
beginning, since he entered the Turkish service without 
reserves, and seems to have held it a point of honour to 
take his instructions loyally from his Turkish paymasters. 
Under him is a stafi of Eve superior officers representing 
the Powers concernedi who have not entered the Turkish 



Digitized by Googlei 



THE PROBLEM OF REFORM 307 



service or donned tlie Turkish uniform.* Each has his 
own secteur, and the allotment of these areas presented 
several thorny diplomatic problems, indeed, the Powers 
debated this question as if they were delimiting spheres 
of influence, or partitioninj^ Macedonian territory, instead 
of merely assigning districts to be reformed. Russia 
obtained the town of Salonica and the western portions 
of the vilayet — an important point if it be true that Austria 
covets the port. To Italy was ijiven Monastir, and if her 
aim be to permeate and ultimately occupy Southern 
Albania she has here a valuable centre for her propaganda, 
— though to be sure the purely Albanian districts of the 
Monastir vilayet are excluded. Austria settled in Uskub, 
which would be a natural centre for the penetration of 
Northern Albania — though here again the Albanian district 
known as ''Old Servia" was excluded. To France was 
given the town and sandjak of Serres, a populous and 
Intensely disaffected district which marches with the Bul- 
garian frontier. England^ anxious only to efface herself 
in the presence of so many rivalries, was content to receive 
the little district of Drama, a sparsely peopled and fairly 
tranquil region of no political importance, where the 
population is mainly Moslem, and, so far as it is Christian, 
is chiefly Greek. 

The original idea^ when the negotiations began at Con- 
stantinople, was apparently to create a genuine international 
gendarmerie for Macedonia with a staff of some sixty 
European officers in eiecntive command, assisted by a 
still larger force of European non-commissioned officers. 
This would indeed have been a reform worth attempting. 
It was a proposal vriiich would have made Europeans 
personally responsible for the order and security of Mace* 
donia. Officers in the towns and sergeants in the burger 
villages would have guaranteed life, honour, and property 
to the peasants. The native element^ well and regularly 
paid, and liable to Instant dismissal in the case of miscon- 
duct, would soon have learned discipline, and might even 

' There i - aho one German officer wbo bas OO MC^f^ but Occupies 
bim^eli with uic school in Salonica. 



Digitized by Google 



MACEDONIA 



have grown enthusiastic in the discharge of its duties. 
The villagers would have realised that Europe had at last 
accepted a real responsibility lor their lot, and from the 
moment the new system came into working order the 
activity of the insurgents would have ceased. But the Turks 
stoutly resisted this plan. Austria and Russia did not press 
it, and England abandoned it when our Ambassador pointed 
out diat it would be difficult to get the Turks to consent 
to a scheme which involved the command by Christians 
of a force in which the rank and file is three-parts Moslem. 
In that rather naive excuse for abandoning a good and 
i^-reaching project Sir Nicholas O'Conor passed an 
unconscious criticism on the whole Mtasteg progrunme. 
It leaves the ideal of Turkish ascendancy untouched. As 
long as we tacitly accept the axiom diat no Christian may 
command a Moslenii we have not even begun to reform. 
When they abandoned the idea of putting Europeans in 
executive command of the new gendarmerie, the Powers 
accepted a serious diplomatic defeat at the hands of the 
Sultan and condemned tiicir whole schemt to lutility. 

All idea of a genuine inlern.j.tionaJ gendarmerie was thus 
set a ide, and m its place the Powers were content to send 
a btatl ul uiticers — at first only twenty-five in number, now 
forty-ei^ht — who are variously described as inbtructors 
and inspectors. Their task is to reorganise the existing 
Turkish force and to some extent to educate it. But its 
command remains exclusively in Turkish hands. The 
European officers may improve the existing material by 
means of the school which has been started in Salonica, 
and they may weed out the more obviously incompetent 
and corrupt. But they can give no commands. The 
Turks may or may not use the reformed gendarmerie ; the 
new officers cannot so much as order the arrest of a 
criminal or oiganlse the capture of a brigand band. Nor 
are they even permitted to investigate the grievances of 
the population in their districts. As soon as they arrived 
they were besieged by peasants anxious to present petitions 
detailing their wrongs. The result was the issue of a 
circular by Hilmi Pasha which forbade the new officers 



^ I J,.. by Gt: 



THE PROBLEM OF KEFOKM 309 



to receive petitions. If an abuse does come under their 
observation they have no authority to remonstrate with 
the Turkish officials in their sphere. They can only report 
to their staff officers, who in turn report to De Georgis 
Pasha, who may or may not carry the mailer to Hilmi 
Pasha's judi^inciit throne. In the last resort the appeal 
is to Con'=:t:mtinc)plL. Some little good, however, has been 
achieved. The gLrichu mLric is now regularly paid, and, 
while it does little or nothmg to maintain order, it is no 
longer the scourge it was. It does little good, but not 
much evil. 

The officers where they happen to be keen and energetic 
do exert some personal influence, as even an unofficial 
European in the interior can always do. The Turks pay 
some attention even to private remonstrances, if they are 
firmly but tactfully made ; and the knowledge that grave 
scandals may be reported exercises a deterrent effect. The 
English Relief Agents were able to do some good in this 
way during the winter of i903«4; and the new officers 
are doubtless able to make their presence felt in the 
same direction, but they have no recognised right of 
interference. 

In January, 1905, Lord Lansdowne put forward a number 
of proposals which would have gone far, had they been 
accepted, to solve the Macedonian problem. He aimed at 
the decentralisation of the administration, and the inter- 
nationalisation of the control. He objected to the claim of 
Austria and Russia to be the only " interested Powers " in 
Macedonia. He suggested a drastic reduction in the 
numbers of the Turkish troops quartered in Macedonia, and 
he would have placed Ihciu under the command ol ihc civil 
authorities. He outlined a scheme for a new Board of 
Control, occupied mainly with finance but free :it the sauic 
time to handle political questions, armed willi *' administra- 
tive and executive " powers, and coiisibtiug of delegates 
appointed by England, France, Germany, and Italy, to- 
gether with the Austrian and Russian Civil Agents. Un- 
fortunately, this excellent programme was accepted only 
in part by Austria and Russia. The demand for an in- 



MACEIX)NJA 



ternational Financial Commission, which was r.ltini idy 
presented to the Sultan in May, clul iiulci 1 achiiit the 
delegates of these four Powers to an equahty with the 
agents of Austria and Russia, but it confined the operations 
of the Commii.bion exclusively to finance, and made no 
explicit demand for direct executive powers. The Sultan 
of course resisted, and when the delegates of the four 
Powers jomed the Civil Agents at Sul inica, early in 
October, the Turks refused them oUiciai recognition. 
Coercion followed, on leisurely and somewhat timid lines, 
and Germany alone refused to share in the naval demon- 
stration. The customs-houses of Mitylene and Lemnos 
were occupied, but it is not certain that the unanimity of 
the Powers would have stood the strain of more drastic 
measures. Early in December a compromise was arranged. 
The Financial Commission will be constituted under the 
presidency of HiUni Pasha, and will include in addition 
one Turkish member. It will act in conjunction with the 
Imperial Ottoman Bank, to which the work of audit is 
entrusted. It will employ three travelling inspectors who 
are to enter the Turkish service, but they enjoy no right 
of interference and no administrative autfaorityi and can 
deal with abuses only indirectly by reporting to the 
Commission. The Commission^ in its turn, is a quasi- 
deliberative Council, which has no executive powers. It 
stands completely outside the Turkish administration, and 
can act only throng Hilmi Pasha, who is its executive 
officer. Should be refuse to carry out its decisions, as he 
l^aliy may, its only resource is to appeal through the 
Civil Agents to the Embassies in Constantinople. Finally, 
while tibte Commission may enact reforms in taxation and 
modify the drafting of the budget, the Sultan is allowed 
a right of veto upon its decisions. Neither the European 
delegates nor their inspectors are the hierarchical superiors 
of the local Turkish officials, who depend as before for 
promotion on the good will of Hilmi Pasha and the favour 
of the Palace. It is not probable that the Turks will often 
meet a unanimous decision of the Commission with a direct 
defiance, but obviously this scheme gives them many oppor- 



Digitized by Google 



THE PROBLEM OF REFORM 311 



tunities for obstruction and delay. They will execute its 
decisions half-heartedly and in bad faith, while making the 
most of every conflict of opinion among the delegates 
themselves. These are for the most part inexperienced 
men, and amonL^ I hem only M. Steeg, the capable and 
popular representative of France, starts with the necessary 
knowledge of Macedonia. The scheme would work well if 
Hilmi Pasha were independent enough and wise enough to 
further it. But he is merely the Sultan's nominee, and will 
doubtless be expected to defeat in detail an obnoxious 
innovation which his master was compelled to accept in 
principle. It seems doubtful whether, even in the sphere 
of finance^ it can achieve macfa more than the gendarmerie 
reforms have done for public order. But at the best its 
scope is limited. It may relieve the peasants from some 
oppressive burdens, but it will not suffice, without a re* 
modelling ol the law-courts and the gendarmerie, to render 
their existence tolerable. It puts no check on the mischief 
which Hilmi Pasha may do by fostering racial strife. It 
will not make the highways safe or the markets accessible, 
and to men whose first need is security, a scientific budget 
will seem a useless luxury. But none the less the creation 
of this new Board goes far to complete a sort of charter 
of international right for Macedonia. It limits Turkish 
authority in theory, and opposes (still in theory) a 
genuinely European institution as a barrier against the 
ambitions of the interested Powers. To this extent Lord 
Lansdowne's recent diplomacy has redeemed the error 
of his earlier concessions to Austria and Russia. There 
is now a sort of scaffolding of reforms built about the 
decaying edifice of Turkish government The state of 
the interior is no better than it was, but the machinery 
of reconstruction is ready whenever Europe acquires the 
resolution to use it. 

• • # • • 

The Murzsteg programme aimed at something more than 

the improvement of the Turkish administrative machinery. 
It htib duiic a very UlUe lu llu:> duccUon| and whca it is 



Digitized by Google 



312 MACEDONIA 

complete it may do more. It s chief aim, however, was to 
bri ng some measure of appeasement^ to restore order ,, to 
^ft«p^tr^h^fj[^ ^nnfir^#»nri»^ fn repair |iPvagfafion^ a,rn|, in a 
w ord, to rem ove th^ motivga for rehellinn. HfiTfi it has 
faUed and the failure k aoreonsaicnQiis that it haft actually 
a ggravated the noq pjtl aq^^hy T he Macedonians mr e 
e ncouraged to hope; the loss of their hone has deepen ed 
th eir despair and inmayj f|iptr n^rlrWcn^ reforms 

le ft the Turks supreme in ail administrative matters* Xh^ 
us ed their liberty to resort to all the old devices of repres- 
sion and provocatio n. Th^ aeemed to contemplate 

a n eventual waf with Bulgaria, and to make a pretext. 
they t I t ) drive the Bnl garjjyiy | p desperate couraea. 
T hey were i r l v i mobilising their troops, calliny out the 
reserves^ and accumulating armaments. The troons liv ed 

o n the peasants .u:;] ilraiiiril the exchequer. 
frequent and di c ine was la x. 
ingJor_annsJiiij;^ 

PCr^ uisitic li, W'*** t^r^n^^imitn^Ut wapitM^ ^pA 

b nitelity. A typical outraji^^e occurred in Febru ary, 1905, 

a t the Bul j ^ari i ill -r^r Ml ICiikli'^hj whprf»j arrrtrfling thi> 
re port of a r^'i . ^^r.Ho»w<M^A r^pf^in hr.ns> < r»if of 

i Qt; were burned. ^8 unarmed peasants killed, includin g 
two women and a baby, five persons wounded, and eleven 




women violated. The whole pl.iec w.l-. piii.i u .i, .li-J th.- 



ofiicers m ade no attempt to check the s^v:i;^erv of th( i r 
mer K It is worthv ot iK^te. thnt the j-^fnrini>ri " ^Tt'nHnrm<><t 
who were present behaved exactlv like the unregen erate 
s oldiery .' As in 1903, the migratory Macedonian labourers 
who annually visit Constantinople ni search of work were 
confined to their villages and forbidden to travel. A curfew 
ordinance was enforced, which renders any peasant abroad 
after sundown liable to be summarily shot. Half the 
refugees from the Adrianople region have been unable 
to return, and their lands were occupied by Moslem 
squatters." In the Monastir vilayet nothing has been 

' Similar afY;iirs occurred during the spring and SUOUZier of X905 at 
Zcrvi, Konopuilsa, MogiU, and elsewhere. 



Digitized by GoOj^Ie 




v.oogle 



THE PROBLEM OF REFORM 313 



done beyond the distribution of a grants ynhkh averaged £1 
per family, to rebuild the burned villages. >}^rlY all the 
r ural Bulgarian scliuul.-. ai c c lrt-^cd InnMOhc the teachers, :ts 
p olitical suspects, are forbiddcii lu instruction . Labtly . 
w ith the evident intention of fomenting the feud betwee n 
G reeks and Bulgarians, Hilmi Pasha has handed over a 
lar ge number of Bulgarian village churches to the Gree k 
f action. But the worst feature of all is the comp licated 
ra cial strife, a sort of furtive civil war, which devastates th e 
country . T he Turks watch this internecine contest, n ot 
merely with tolerance, but with satisfaction . The r ayah s 
ar e at war among themselve s, and the master may fold his 
arms. But the real responsibility lies with the Governm ent, 
which connives at the vendetta and seeks to profit by it . 
T he Turks, despite their vast armaments, have proved onc e 
m ore their total incapacity to maintain evep tftftwy^ 
s emblance of ord er. 

The Miirzsteg programme has failed, largely because it 
attempted to reform Macedonia without reckoning with the 
Macedonians. It was an advertisement to all the world that 
the Near Eastern Question was open at last It bore on its 
surface the marks of transition* No one could imagine it 
to be final, and no one could suppose that, having recog- 
nised the impossibility of Turkish rule, the Powers would 
ultimately shrink from drawing the logical conclusion. It 
announced to every race in the Balkans that the end was 
approaching, and inevitably it accentuated their latent 
rivalries and hostilities. The Turks^ wounded in their 
prestige and restricted in their authority, were tempted 
to prove that they still possess a certain vigour and some 
capacity for resistance. ** If we must go/' said they, " we 
will go fighting"; and while they oppc^ed a sullen and 
passive resistance to the reforms, they prepared for the 
decisive struggle with the Bulgarians, partly by the usual 
measures of repression, partly by cementing their alliance 
with the Qmtk faction, and partly by making ready for 
a war with tiie Principality — a war for which the pre- 
occupation of Russia seemed to present a golden oppor- 
tunity. As for the Christian races, the nearer the decisive 



3H 



MACEDONIA 



moment approacbedf the acuter became their jealousies.^ 
U the Turks were going to be elbowed out, each wished to 
secure its own foothold in advance. The insurrecdon of 
1903 had left Europe with the impression that the Bulgan 
are the dominant element Inevitably the Greeks were 
tempted to assert themselves. The Mdnsteg scheme showed 
signs o£ drawing over again the old boundaries ol the San 
Stefono Treaty. Hence the zeal of the Greeks in loosing 
their guerilla bands over all the debatable country where 
the Greek party has a footing. Europe might not like 
their methods, but at least it would be compelled to recog" 
nise the vitality of '* Hellenism." All this was natural, and 
might have been foreseen. As little can the Bulgarians 
afford to disarm. They can trust neither Europe, nor the 
Turks, nor their fellow-^Christians. Their revolutionary 
Committee^ with all its bloody and violent methods, is 
the one weapon they possess. Quiescence would be in- 
terpreted as satisfaction, and mth these outlines and 
tentattves of reform they cannot possibly be satisfied. 
Their battle is only half won, and until they realise 
that Europe has taken up their cause in earnest it 
would be folly for them to disband their organisation. 
Notiiiii.L.; IcbS l.ha.11 an diiarcliv so intolerable that it 
threatens to develop into lonnal war, ever inducc^j ihc 
Concci I to act with decision. The ability to create such 
an anarchy at will is the only effective means which tlie 
subject-races of Turkey possess of recalling Europe to 
her pledges and her responsibilities. The Committee will 
not dissolve until we impose some solution which has an 
air of finality ; and until the Committee dissolves, there if; 
no hope of peace in Macedonia. It is futile to talk of 
suppressing it. The Turks are incapable ot such a task, 
for it has behind it a dour and virile race, a race which 
is ready to make sacrifices to win its freedom. When 
once a serious European control is impoi>ed it will be 

* Several Servian bands appeared in the North, while the Greeks 
ravaged the Sooth. They wera less socoessfal Qua the Greeks, becatoe 
they had to meet the hoeUUtr not onhr ol the BolMriaiis but also ol the 
Turks. 



Digitized by Google 



THE PROBLEM OF REFORM 315 



snperfinous to suppress it It will disband of its own free 
will 

• • * • « 

It is dear that the MQrzsteg scheme holds the field only 

because the two Powers responsible for it are unwilling to 
face the patent fact of its failure. They may extend it and 
even strengthen it, but so lon^^ Ihey hesitate to demand 
executive powers, it is vain to liope ioi :iny real progress. 
While the Sultan is master of Macedonia, there will be 
neither reform nor peace. Through whatever further 
pli.i^ts of transition the crisis may pass, it must be solved in 
the end by the imposition of direct European control. 
The only question about that control, is whether it shall be 
exercised by two Powers or by five — whether, in other 
words, Macedonia is to be partitioned between Austria and 
Russia, or whether under one disgui>'.- or another it is to be 
raised into an autonomous province under international 
protection. To suppose that Austria and Russia sincerely 
believe that the stains quo can be maintained for ever, is to 
accuse them of an incredible imbecility. But they stoutly 
oppose any form of autonomy. The inference is that the 
ultimate solution to which they lean is that Macedonia 
should be absorbed by themselves. They may not seek to 
provoke the catastrophe — they may even wish to postpone 
it But they are not blind to what Mr. Roosevelt would 
call their " manifest destiny/' 

It is difHcult to discuss the consequences of the partition of 
Macedonia between Austria and Russia, because both these 
Empires seem to be approaching a period of transformation. 
If Austro-Hungary should in any sense of the word " break 
up " after the death of the Emperor Francis Joseph, if the 
Germans should detach themselves or even cease to be 
the dominant race in Austria, mnd if at the same time the 
Magyars should achieve a completer independence^ the 
Austria of the future will become in character if not in name 
a Slavonic federation. In such a union the Serbs, the 
Montenegrins, and the Western Macedonians might ulti- 
mately find a place side by side with the Poles, the Csechs, 
and the Croats without any sense of incongruity or any 



I 



Digitized by Google 



MACEDONIA 



consciousness of submitting to an alien domination. Nor 
is it otherwise vvitli Russia. If the present movement of 
liberation realises the hopes of the more resolute and 
enUghtened wing of the Zemstvo party of reform, the 
Russian Empire will become a liberal Union, in which 
Poles, Finns, Ruthenians, and Armenians will enjoy a 
measure of national freedom, while sharing in the larger life 
of a great Slavonic Federation. To such an Empire the 
Bulgarians and Macedonians might safely confide their 
liberties, with every prospect of gaining by a close associa- 
tion with kindred races which boast an older and more 
developed civilisation. To some minds such a solution 
would present great attractions. It seems to offer all the 
guarantees for liberty and for a healthy variety of types 
which the system of small nationalities possesses, while it 
is free from the taint of parochialism and racial egoism. 
The exaggerated and militant nationalism of the Balkan 
peoples is undoubtedly a curse to themselves, and an 
obstacle to civilisation. It 18 preferable only to the brutal 
uniformity which the present Russian tyranny imposes. 
The middle course of federalism presents a hopeful escape 
from the present choice between nationalism and imperi- 
alism. But these after all are remote chances. Austria in 
all likelihood will not " break up " ; and Russia, when she 
obtains a genuine constitution, will doubtless have to pass 
through a long and troubled evolution, before she attains 
the ideal of a tolerant and liberal federation. We have to 
deal with Austria and Russia as they are. 

The first question, so far as Austria is concerned, is 
whether, on the whole, the interests of the Macedonians 
would be best served by their incorporation in the 
Empire on the terms 'which Bosnia and Herzegovina enjoy. 
Undoubtedly they might meet with a worse late. TTicy 
need above all things a period of repose and educa- 
tion. Under Austrian rule Ihey would enjoy a fair measure 
of personal liberty, and every opportunity for material 
development The roads and the railways would be im* 
proved, the police organised, the courts purified, the schools 
fostered and agriculture encouraged. Capital would flow 



I 
I 

Digitized by Google' 



THE PROBLEM OF REFORM 317 



in, and before a generation had passed, tiie present anarchy 
and poverty would be a remote memoryi and Macedonia 
with Its broad plains under drainage and tillage would 
support three times Its present population in comfort and 
even in affluence. The peasants are materialists, and for a 
time at least they would ask for nothing better. But after 
twenty-seven years of Austrian rule, the Serbs of Bosnia are 
far from being contented or loyal, though undoubtedly they 
have much to be grateful for. They enjoy no more freedom 
than the Italians did under Austrian rule two generations 
ago. There is no liberty of speech or of the press. Von 
Kallay, who invented the system, used to relate with a grim 
smile that the first book which he placed on the censor^s 
index was his own " History of the Serbs " I Every symptom 
of national feeliniE^ is repressed, ■j.nd there is one direction in 
which the excellctu new roads do not lead — to Servia. The 
Bosni in Serlvs .ire cut oit irurn their racc-fcllovvs of the 
kingdom cninpletely as if a sea divided them, for the 
Austrian police watch the frontier. Tlie administration is 
at great pains to prevent faction iighti> between its Moslem, 
Orthodox, and Catholic subjects ; but those who know 
anything of its methods are wont to accuse it of undisc^ised 
favouritism towards the Moslem and Catholic mm unties. 
The more numerous Orthodox Serbs who remember their 
gallant struggle again^^t the Turks, and their ambition to 
join the Servian kingdom, have to be repressed, discreetly 
and humanely no doubt, but still repressed. There has 
been as vet no real development of free local government ; 
such municipal institutions as exist are entirely dominated 
by the bureaucracy. Austria, in short, has done more to 
develop Bosnia than to educate the Bosnians. She would 
doubtless follow the same methods it she were allowed to 
assume the guardianship ol Macedonia. For five years, 
perhaps even for ten, it would matter little ; but the Bul- 
garians and the Vlachs have too much virility and too keen 
an instinct for organisation, to acc^t the position of minors 
indefinitely. The revolutionary Committee has fostered 
the democratic sjpmi, and sooner or later they would begin 
to resist a too paternal government* Moreover, they have 



Digitized by Google 



3i8 



MACEDONIA 



now acquired the coiMcioasiieas of nationality. They would 
resent an arrangement ^ich threatened to cot them off for 
ever from the eastern half of Macedonia and firom the 
Bulgarian princtpalitj. The Exarchist Church would 
provide a link between the three severed limbs of the 
Bulgarian people as the Catholic Church knits the Poles 
together^ and Austria would maintain her ascendancy only 
by making incessant war upon the sentiments of her 
subjects. 

The case against a Russian occupation is incomparably 
stronger. Whatever sciiUiiicnt of ficilLi nily may now unite 
Bulgarians and J\iissians is no guarantee agauist the usual 
proceedings ot the Kussianising party. They would make 
\var upon the Bulgarian language, subject the now indepen- 
dciu Exarchist Church to the Russian Huiy Synod, and 
foist upon an essentially manly and democratic race a 
system of personal government as reactionary as that of the 
Turks. The non-Slavonic races would fare even woi se — 
Jews and Greeks would be treated as are the Armenians in 
the Caucasus, and the Turks miqht be used against the 
Christians as are the Tartars round Baku and Tiflis. But, 
indeed, all this is so obvious that one need not insist upon 
it. The Macedonians have not struggled to throw off the 
yoke of the Turks in order to court the fate of the Finns 
and the Poles. 

it must not be forgotten that the destiny of Macedonia 
involves the future of most, if not aU| of the other Balkan 
States.^ If Austria and Russia were allowed to divide 
Macedonia between them the independence of Servia and 
Bulgaria would become the merest fiction — if it were even 
so much as that. If Austria obtains Salonica she will 
certainly wish to control the railway which links it with 
Vienna, and that railway runs through Nisch and Belgrade. 
Already Servia finds herself elbowed and jostled by too 
many neighbours. A rather domineering Austria holds the 
gates of the West, a jealous Bulgaria faces her on the East 

' This .'ispcct of ihc qiio^rion !ias hccii overlooked by the Sf'd iator 
and the Slandardt which are now inviting Kuiiia to come down to 
Con btan till ople. 



Digitized by Google 



THE PROBLEM OF REFORM 319 



Only theroadtoSalonicaisopeiu M^th Austria entretiched 
along her soutfaem frontier and camped across the Vardar, 
she would be virtually throttled ; and if she wished to escape 
complete absorption, she could do so only by adopting an 
attitude of submission and humility that would be scarcely 
less degrading than actual conquest. The case of Bulgaria^ 
with the Black Sea Fleet commanding her ports and a 
Russian army of occupation settied in Eastern Macedonia 
and Adrianople, would be no better. If she dared to assert 
her independence she would be crushed, if she bowed to 
superior force her independence would be merely nominal. 
Servia, though her peasants are prosperous and contented, 
is not exactly a credit to civilisation, and one cannot say 
that her politicul extinction would be a serious loss to 
Europe. But Bulj^ai ia is a vigorous and progressive State, 
whose public and otBcial life ukjvcs on an incomparably 
higher plane than that 01 Ivussia. Her absorption in an 
autocratic Empire would be a loss to Europe and a defeat 
for freedom. Should Scrvia and Bulgaria be confounded 
with Albania and Macedonia in the two illiberal Eastern 
Empires, one may even doubt whether Koumania, 
Montenegro, and Greece could maintain more than a feeble 
and precarious existence as the vassals and parasites of their 
all-powerful neighbi)i!rs. 

In ljl^: leli's day the prospect of Russia and Austria 
establishing thiemselves upon the shores of the ^gean, and 
dividing the Balkan Peninsula between them, would have 
sent our navies to the Dardanelles and brought our armies 
from india. To-day we should view such a development 
with displeasure perhaps, but hardly with alarm. Indeed, 
our passion for remote adventures has ahnost brought us to 
forget that we are a European people. It is well that 
the Jingo of our modern music-halls is less interested in 
Turkish affairs than he was in 1878* We are happily too 
enlightened to argue to-day that we are necessarily injured 
because Russia may be aggrandised. From the old half- 
barbarous standpoint of the ** balance of power," such an 
increase of territory and population as the partition of the 
Balkan Peninsula would bring to Russia and Austria, would 



Digitized by Google 



MACEDONIA 



have been thought a disaster of the first m:ignitude to our- 
selves. Hut if such reasoning no longer appeals to civilised 
people, there is a point of view of which we need not be 
ashamed, from which such a change in the map of Europe 
would seem deplorable and even monstrous. To the three 
liberal nations of the West it ought not to be indifierent 
that races capable of liberty, and eager to share in the 
general life of the freer half of Europe^ should be smothered 
within the reactionary systems of two conservative Empires. 
It is worth an e£fort to keep them within reach ol the 
humaner influences which are building up a kindlier and 
juster society undisturbed by the ambitions of hired soldiers 
and professional ruling castes. By surrendering the Balkans 
to Austria and Russia we should condemn their peoples to 
a retroi^ade political life^ and at the same time strengthen 
the forces of militariam and despotism in Europe. It may 
be objected that the little States of the Balkans have given 
as yet few proofs of enlightenment or capacity. At least 
they have shown themselves as capable of parliamentary 
government as Austria» and more zealous for freedom than 
tiie dominant classes in Russia. But the Balkan peoples 
have not yet had their chance. With a liberal settlement 
of the Macedonian problem these little communities will 
acquire for the first time in their history the possibility of a 
free life of their own. Nothing so much as this disastrous 
question retards ihtk development at present. 

Loaded with armaments, honeycombed by the secret 
intrigues of Austrian and Russian agents, preoccupied by 
external questions, obsessed by the shadow of 
and llic di cud of war, overrun by refugees and disturbed 
by the violence of the rc\ oliniop,;irv Committees winch iiiid 
a haven and a base vviliin! thur boidci:>, iiulgiHUi, and in 
a less degree Scrvia and Greece, lack the leisure to pursue 
their own development. The grossest Chauvinism runs 
riot among them ; and while a chaos of barbarism lies at 
their doors, civilisation and the ideas for which it stands 
seem remote and irrelevant. They are partisans in the 
rivalries of populations le^s developed than themselves; and 
although a frontier holds him at arm's length, the Turk 



Digitized by GoogI< 



THE PROBLEM OF REFORM jai 



has still the power to haunt and degrade their lives. We 
are often impatient at the comparatively slow progress of 
the Balkan States towards stability and enlightenment But 
so long as we condemn them to live the turbulent life of 
bcMrderers, we have no right to our disappointment or sur- 
prise. They can have no worthy or tranquil career until 
the question of Macedonia is solved ; as they can hope for 
no permanent or independent existence if it should be 
absorbed by Aubtna and Russia. 

***** 
The forces which are making for a solution of the Mace- 
donian tiuestion by some arrangement which would pave 
the way for its partition between Austria and Russia may 
prove triumphant, but tlicre is enough evidence of a will to 
resist such a calamity among the other three Powers to 
make it worth while to discuss the alternative of an inter- 
national control. The conditions which a solution at once 
practical and liberal ought to satisfy, may, i think, be set out 
somewhat as follows : — 

(a) It must, if possible, avoid war as a necessary prelimi- 
nary. It must, therefore, give no evident and unfair advan- 
tage to any one of the rival Balkan States. At the same 
time it must not handle the Sultan so brusquely as to com- 
pel him to defy Europe. Some show of force will probably 
be necessary before Abdul Hamid accepts any genuine 
reform. But unless the conditions are too onerous, a 
bloodless naval demonstration before Salonica or Smyrna 
will be quite sufficient The Turks on these occasions do 
not so much require compulsion as a pretext for yielding. 
They will submit to superior force, but the force must take 
a visible and obvious form. If, on the other hand, any 
attempt were to be made to drive the Turks utterly out of 
Macedonia, they would doubtless contest every stage of the 
retreat and cover their course with ruins. 

(b) The solution must be promising enough, and final 
enough, to induce the revolutionary Committees to dis- 
solve, or at least to transform tfaemsdves into innocent 
political organisations. 

(c) The problem is not so much how to dispossess the 



322 



MACEDONIA 



Turks of power, if how best to substitute direct European 
oontrol lor the pertonal role of the Sultan and the Palace 

clique. 

(d) A aoitslactocy sdieme most oonimend itself to all the 
minoritieB concerned, Ifcelems as wdi as Greeks and 
Vlachfl, as one Ukdy to goarantee eqnality <d treatment 
and even opportunity for growth* 

To itate ttieie conditions is to rnle two aolntions out of 
court, lor each of which some cogent argnmeots could be 
nrged. Macedonia could not be partitioned among the 
neighbouring Balkan States unless the Turks had been 
uttaiy cnnfaed bj a dimetrons war ; nor would the Saltan 
readily consent to a nationalist autonomy of the Cretan 
type. This latter solution, indeed, would offer no adequate 
security to minorities. The Greeks would resist a Bul- 
garian hegemony and the Bulgarians would find it difiioult 
to be tolarant As for tiie ICoslems, the unfurling of an 
autonomous national standard would be the signal for their 
emigration. Without further preface I will venture to 
suggest the outlines of a possible constitution which seems 
in n:y judgincnt to avoid some of the main diiiiciiltics. 

I. Since the chief object of a reform of the administra- 
tion is to Withdraw the actual government ol Macedonia 
from Coiibtantinoplc, 1 am of opinion that the international 
authority should be a board of Delegates from the Five 
Protecting Powers, who would reside in Macedonia, enjoy 
a large independence of action and communicate with their 
own Governmentis directly without the formality of referring 
for instructions to the Embassies. This Board should 
enjoy all the authority of ?i Ministry in a constitutional 
country. If it were composed of the class of men who 
form the consular corps in Saionica 1 believe it would work 
harmoniously and well.* 

2* It would, I think, be worth while to try the ezpert- 

> I assmne tfatt Genmny would probably wish to ftuid aloof, u aho 

did in the case of Crete. She has her own reasons for refusing to join 
in any concerted action to coerce the SuUaa, and she cynically dis- 
avows aov hunmnitariaii conoeni ts to the fate of Macedonia. She 
would not be likely to tend more than s raiirMaatiBw with a watduQ| 
btkL 



Digitized by GoogI< 



THE PROBLEM OF REFORM 313 



nUMlt of appointing a Turkish Govcnior-CicnLTiLl. He might 
be nominated by the International Board, though fur iuini's 
sake the SuUan's approval should be obtained ; or, vice versd^ 
he might be chosen by the Board from a list to be submitted 
by the Sultan. The Board would have to be armed with 
the right of dismissal. His appointment should be for a 
tixed term, which might be renewed indefinitely, and he 
should be guaranteed a pension which could be forfeited 
only by misconduct gross enough to bring about his dis- 
missal. The Sultan must have no ric^ht to dismiss. 

I believe that a re isonably intcMiL^Liit and tolerant T^irk 
elected on these conditions WDukl govei n sensibly and with 
dignity. He would not be in :uiy real sense of the word a 
Turkish othcial, still less would he be an emissary of Yildiz 
Palace. Knowing that he could not be removed by the 
Sultan, and that he could rely upon an assured future, he 
would have every motive to serve Macedonia welL At the 
same time his duties should not be large, since the real 
work of administration should be performed by Europeans. 
But his appointment would serve two purposes. In the 
first place it would " save the face " of the Sultan and give 
a show of reality to his suzerainty. In the second place it 
would conciliate the local Mohamedan population, induce 
them to give the new rigime a fair trials and assure them 
that Europe intended to treat them not merely with justice 
but with consideration. To the old-fashioned Turkish 
countiy gentleman it would mean a great deal, that when he 
went in to Salonica or Monasttr he would still find a Moha- 
medan seated in the kmak enjoying the title of Governor, 
and treated with formal and ceremonious courtesy by the 
infideb vriio had been admitted to the administration. If 
the Governor were a wise and tactful man, and accepted the 
new order of things with a good grace, his personal influence 
on behalf of a policy of conciliation would be worth an army 
corps. He would earn his salary if he would merely repeat 
the sort of anecdotal and proverbial philosophy which the 
T^ks love, to all who called upon hun— turning the moral 
on behalf of peace. One has to rememt>er that the Moslem 
popubtion will feel aggrieved and humiliated by the im* 



Digitized by Google 



3H 



MACEDONIA 



position of European control, and an arrangement which 
would soften its regrets widiout endangering Hat success of 
the reforms would be welt worth a trial. ' 

3. The same reasoning which tells in favour of a Mofaa> 

medan Governor-General should induce us to aoo^t a 
number of Moslem prefects {Caimakatm). I doubt if it 

would be necessary to have any Valis at all, but some of 
the Caimakams might rank as Pashas. In districts mainly 
Greek or Bulgan ;m the Caimakam should be of the faith 
of the majority, but where the Moslem minoiity is a.i ail 
considerable it would be wise to appoint a Turk. The 
Governor-General should have the right to appoint these 
oflicials, after consultation with the International Board. 
Their functions, like his own, should be mainly formal and 
personal — to act as local representatives of the idea of 
conciliation, and not to attempt, as the old Caimakatus did, 
to concentrate every imaginable I unction of government in 
their own hands. In a very tew peculiarly turbuicni and 
difficult districts the ]>reteet ought perhaps to be an expe- 
rienced European — preferably an ex-consul or vice-consul. 

4. Whatever arrangement may be made, it is to be foreseen 
that the Palace will attempt to maintain its old system of 
espionage and interference. To obviate this and to em- 
phasise the fact that the Governor-General is not respon- 
sible to the Sultan, it might perhaps be well to allow Abdul 
Hamid to nominate a special Imperial Commissioner of 

' It is more important t!:at the Governor should be a Moslem than 
that he should be a Turk. It might be possible to And a really well- 
edocated candidate in Hg>-pt, Tunis, or Bosnia, if the jealomy of Hm 
Powers permitted. I have adopted this suggestion of a Mohamedan 
Governor-General only after n ^ood deal of reflection and hesitation. 
There is much to be said in iavuur oi driving out the Turk^ altogether, 
and appointing some European Prince to preside over an aotonomoos 
State. But such a solution could hardly be attained without war. If 
war does come, the problem will be vastly simplified. But even in 
that event there is sometliius to be said for a pohcy that would con- 
ciliate tiie local Moslems. The plan of nominating a Turk^ however, 
could scarcely be final. It would bridge over 1 period of transition, 
and pave the way for a more natural and durable arraagenieat I have 
tried here to suggest the minimnni ol cbttife consistent with nay real 
reform But if the crisis becomes violent, and a catastrophe cannot be 
averted, wc may as well solve the wbole questkm at one stroitt bj 
appointing a European. 



Digitized by Goog e 



THE PROBLEM OF REFORM 325 



his own, who would enjoy no executive powers whatieveTi 
but would have the right to speak to the International 
Board in the Sultan's name. Such an arranL^Lineiit, though 
apparently a concession to the Palace, vvuuld really give the 
new Macedonia the character of a quasi-foreign State. 
The other uliici ils might then be casiiicred immediately 
if detected in any direct correspondence with Yildiz Kiosq. 

5. The present system, consecrated by the Murz^^teg pro- 
gramme, by which each Power is responsible for a special 
area, is a thorouc^hlv mischievous arrangement. It is 
objectionable, bec<iuse it tempts the Powers to treat their 
districts as spheres of intluence, and to employ themselves 
in securing tiicir own position instead of executing reforms. 
There ought to be nnilOrmily so far a? local circumstances 
permit, and it is manilest that the methods of English and 
of Russian officials will show a very wide divergence. A 
better plan would be that each Power should assume 
responsibility for one department of the Administration. In 
this way the Internationai Board would be a genuine M mistry, 
though necessarily of a bureaucratic type.' Austria, 
which has done such excellent ecmiomic work in Bosnia 
and Herzegovina, might take charge of the Public Works 
and of Agriculture. Russia, as an Orthodox Power, would 
be peculiarly fitted to manage education and the Churches. 
France, which is already interested in the Ottoman Bank, 
might take charge ol Finance. Italy, as the Power which 
organised the Cretan gendarmerie^ miglit be made responsible 
for Public Order. England, utilising her Egyptian experi- 
ence, might control the Courts and tibe local administration. 
Theses of course, are tentative suggestions and are put 
forward merely to illustrate the main idea. What is im- 
portant is that the European Minister should enjoy absolute 
and untrammelled authority, subject only to the general 
approval of his colleagues and his Government He should 
have complete freedom to choose his own staff from his 
own or other European States (including those of the 
Balkan peninsula), or from native elements. 

' Tiie board of Financial Control would require very Uttie rcmodgtU 
ing to become such a Ministry as I propose. 



Digitized by Google 



3^6 



MACEDONIA 



&, It would, I think, be a mistake to attempt at the begin- 
ning way imitation oip Parliamentary Government. Under 

actual conditions a Parliament would merely be a battie- 
field between rival races, and would do no useful work. 

On the other hand, even the peasants have an ancient 
tradition of iuciil :5clf-govcrnment. In each village there 
should be, as at present, a sm.dl council ol ciders and a 
headman elected by a manhood suffrage.* This Councd 
would stand between the peasants and the Administration, 
arrange the details of taxation, manage the school and the 
local communications, act as a tribunal of the first instance 
in small disputes, and assist in tlie preservation of order. 

For all tliese concrete offices the peasants in their huniblc 
and practical way are quite competent. It would be natural 
and easy to group the villages in Districts corresponding 
more or less to tlie present Nahies, and to form District 
Comicils composed of one or more elders from each village. 
To preside over the Districts, I think the Council might be 
trusted to elect a local President,^ instead of the Mudir, 
usually some insignificant clerk, who at present represents 
the Turkish bureaucracy. The President would act as a 
sort of police magistrate. The Macedonian peasant has as 
yet no developed national outlook, but he is keenly con- 
cerned about the affairs of his own district, and an 
arrangement of this sort would satisfy his wish for self- 
government, and educate him in the real affaira which 
ought to be the concern of Governments. 

it might be well to summon the District Presidents two 
or three times a year for a lew days at a time to a aorC ol 
national Deliberative Assembly. Their experience would 
be useful. They would gain fresh ideas biy contact with 
their colleagues and their superiors. They woold have the 
right to speak for the peasants who elected them. But 
since they would be chosen primarily to act as jud^ and 
local adminisfrators, they would probably not be drawn 

* The Turkish plin ol a property qoalification is to be avoided, lor it 
merely makes in every hamlet a close and corrupt oli?^nrchical clique. 

* The Slav communes betore the Turkish conqut;st were ^ouped 
in fhii way under elected chiefs oiled DjopMis. 



Digitized by GoogI( 




Google 



THE PROBLEM OF REFORM 327 



from the agitLitor type, which might come to the front if 
any system of direct election for li purely parliamentary 
purpose were to be attempted too early.* 

7. The maintenance of order would be in the hands of a 
highly disciplined gendarmerie consisting of native elements 
both Christian and Moslem, officered by Europeans. It 
would be an expensive force, and for that reason should 
not be too l:\r[^e. To supplement it, it mi,L(ht be useful to 
expand the traditional system of rural guards (hekchi) into 
a kind of non-professionai auxiliary force. Every village 
might select five to ten of its young men, who would be 
armed with rifles and possibly required to undergo some 
elementary training." They should not be expected to 
perform ordinary police duties, or, mdeed, to act at all 
on their own initiative; and they should remam peasants 
and civilianSi busied with their fields. But until the 
country is quite settled, its feuds appeased, and brigandage 
suppressed, they would form a useful and inexpensive local 
force, which might be called upon by the headman to resist 
a sudden inroad of brig^ds or to repel an invasion of 
bashi'bazoukSf or summoned by a patrolling gendarme to 
assist him in any perilous duty. Apart from these village 
guardsy the population, whether Moslem or Christian^ 
should be forbidden to own or carry rifles. 

8. The Turkish army should be reduced to modest 
proportionsy and should consist entirely of local levies. 
Its commander should be subordinated to ttie civil 
Govemor«Generaly and it should be paid and provisioned 
at the expense of llacedoniar- an arrangement which 
might lake the plaoe of an Imperial tribute^ If Macedonia 
paid its own share of flie army and met its existing 
obligatioas to the Ottoman Public Debt, it ought not 
to be required to do more for the Empire* 

With these restrictions ^ army would be useful. It 

■ The discontent in Crete under Prince George's bureuicratic ad^ 
mioistndaii it a warning a^ainit th« riak of nfnting load nlf- 
govonunent. 

■ The Turks themselves maintained a force of this sort oxider the 
name of Amstolti op tiU dio Gmfc War of lodepondence. 



Digitized by Google 



32S 



MACEDONIA 



would give confidence to flie load MosleRiSy and me the 
Sultui from too galling a loss of prestige. At the same 
tune, if it were mainly employed to watch the Albanian 
bcM'der, it would contribute to the prevention of raiding 
and brigandage. 

9. It IS unnecessary to say much about the actual reforms 
which a Eui upcan Ministry would find it necessary to carry 
out. The system of tithe-farming would be aboH^ln cl at 
once. Some very drastic agrarian legislation would be 
inevitable, and if funds could be obtained, the best plan 
would be to buy out all the landlords and settle their 
estates upon peasant-proprietors before the price of land 
has time to rise. Many of the 6<?vs have iin title-deeds, 
and nearly all of them obtamed their lands by violence. 
They are not capitalists — the peasants supply not only the 
labour but the beasts and the implements. It would be 
equitable to buy out their rights at a comparatively low 
figure. Another di£Bcult problem Is raised by the position 
of the Chnrches, which exercise many of the functions 
that belong to the Civil Courts in any developed State. 
The Churdbesare the great forcing-beds of racial intolerance, 
and the more they can be restricted to purely sinrituai 
duties the better wtU it be alike for religion and for social 
peace. A university college where young men of all races 
and creeds could be trained together under European 
professors mig|it do muchi as Midhat Pasha saw^ to break 
down the buriers ?diich at present divide Moslems and 
Christians, Greeks and Bulgarians. That die young men 
of promise should be caught up by one national propa- 
g^da or the other, and tooouiaged to study in So6a or 
in Athens, is an arrangement which tends to intensify local 
feuds. It is by its success in grappling with such questions 
as these that an International Control will be judged. If 
it tails to solve the agrarian question, the men who are 
figlibng to-day to destroy Turkish rule will find no difficulty 
in converting their revolutionary Committee into a for- 
midable Land League, which will make war upon the 
beys with aU the old violent methods — boycott, arson, and 
murder. 



^ by Gt 



THE PROBLEM OF REFORM 329 



On the whole, I think this the most formidable danger 
which Macedonia has to face. The racial feud will tend to 

disappear as soon as the Turks cease to ferment it. More- 
over, it must be remembered that the " Gr t;ek " faction is, 
except ill the South, a wholly artilicial party. It consists of 
Slavs, Albanians, and half-Hellenised Vlachs, who favour it 
largely because the Turks treat it wiLii partiality. If it were 
perfectly safe and perfectly respectable for these people to 
profess themselves Bulgarians, Albanians, or Vlachs, few of 
them in the loni^ run would hesitate to do so. The Greek 
interest will tend to dwindle, save in the South and in the 
towns, with the disappearance of the old type of intriguing 
and persecuting Pasha. When that happens, {he Bn]<^arians 
will be, in all the northern and central districts, in a position 
of uncontested predominance. If they display a reasonable 
amount of tact and tolerance the feud will die of itself. 

ID. It would obviate much injustice, and help to disen* 
tangle the present confusion of races, if a Land Conunission 
were instituted to facilitate exchanges. All the Balkan races, 
save the Bulgarians, have the migratory habit Albanians 
dissatisfied with the new ti^me might prefer to return to 
Albania. Slavs left stranded in an unreformed Albania 
would certainly wish to emigrate to Macedonia. Within 
Macedonia itself, and* even within the Bulgarian princi- 
pality, there are, doubtless, Greeks who would like to leave 
a Slav district and settle in an area where they could speak 
their own tongue and be governed by men of their own 
race. The more such exchanges were encouraged the less 
risk would there be of racial friction. There is certain to 
be a stampede of the worse type of Turks from a reformed 
Macedonia. It is important to save them from selling out 
at an unjust price, and at the same time to fill their places 
with immigrants whose caise will be bettered by llie trans- 
ference. 

The outline sketched above would be applicable with a 
few modific itions to the whole of European Turkey — and, 
for that matter, to the more advanced regions of A'^ia Minor 
as well, more particularly the provinces where Armenians 
are numerous. But if we are to regard Macedonia as in 



330 



MACEDONIA 



anj tenae a tuuk, there m oertun regions wfaidi would lie 
onliide it^ lor lihk^ tomelliing ought to be done wtttioiit 
defaiy. llie BolgBrien districtB of the Adrianople vibfet 
are in a peculiarly pitiable position at present They stand 
ou ts i de the scope of the Aastro-Russian reforms, and have 
su£Fered cruelly from the campaign which Abdul Hamid has 
directed of late against the whole Bulgarian race. At the 
same time since thev do not adjoin Macedonia, and are 
separated irum il by :i tract of coLiiitrv inhabited mainlv by 
Mohciiiicdans, it is diilicuit to include them for adiiiiiiis- 
trative purposes in Macedonia proper. These districts 
are not very extensive or very wealthy, and cannot 
be of anv j^reat value to the Turkish Empire. The 
siinplcsl solution, since they march with tlie Bulgarian 
Principality, would be to persuade the Sultan to sell them | 
to her in return for a fair price, which the Powers might j 
guarantee. I 

The case of " Old Servia " might be treated in the same 
way, i.e., the district lying between the Servian frontier 
and the Uskub-Mitrovitzn railway might be bought by the 
Servian kingdom (see pp. 280-1). 

Greece would then have a claim to purchase the Sandjak 
of Serfidje, which adjoins Thessaly, the coast district of 
Caterina, the peninsula of Chalcidic^, and the island of 
Thasos— regions where the population is almost wholly { 
Greek by race, language, and sympathy, | 

If the Sultan manifested an insuperable reluctance to ) 
these alienations of territory, these three districts might 
be included provisionally in Macedonia under the genera! 
supervision of the European Ministry and the Turkish ' 
Govemor-GeneraL But they ought to hare a separate and 
more or less autonomous administration, modelled upon 
the plan adopted in Macedonia proper. Their Governors 
should be respectively a Bulgarian, a Serb, and a Greek, 
subject to the control of junior European officiab in each, 
who would act as the delegates ol the Supreme Internationa] 
Board of Control. 

The result of these rearrangements (excluding for the 
moment these minor districts) wonld be to divide European 



Digitized by Google 



THE FKOBLEM. OF KEFQRM 331 



Turkey into three ^eat areas, in each of which the popula- 
tion would be iaii ly honiogeneoiis. 

I. Macedonia, which would be mainly Bulgarian, with an 
infusion of Albanians in the West and a sinallcr Greek 
element in the towns of the South^ and a spnniding of 
Vlachs everywhere. 

IT, Alhaniat including the present vilayets of Jannina 
and Scutari, with the Albanian districts of the Mon.istir and 
Uskub vilayets, would remain for separate treatment. It is 
too soon to decide whether the Albanians are capable of 
autonomy, and if they are, thev ought certainly to have a 
decidedly monarchical and almost feudal form of govern* 
ment (see Chapter Viil. p. 285). 

111. A third area, Thrace, including the southern and 
western portions of the Adrianopie vilayet, with the 
peninsula of Gallipoli and the metropolitan area of Con- 
stantinople. Here the majority of the population is 
Mohamedan. There is a large Astatic (Turkish) element. 
The Bulgarians are nearly all Pomacks— Moslems. The 
Christians are mainly Greeks, merchants and fishermen, 
who do not suffer very grievously from the domestic 
tyranny of Turkish landlords, and betray no active dis- 
loyalty. The destinies of this area may well be postponed 
to some more distant crisis. It is possible that the district 
of Drama, which belongs ethnologically rather to this 
third area than to Macedonia proper, ought to be included 
in it 

The lapse ol a few years will enable os to judge more 
clearly than is possible to-day what the ultimate fate of these 
three areas should be. It seems to me probable that in the 
course of a generation there will be a considerable movement 
of emigration from one area to another. Macedonia will 
probably become lairiy homogeneous and overwhelmingly 
Bulgarian. Its T^irin will move eastward to the third area, 
some of its Albanians may possibly drift westwards to 
Albania proper-^ou^ this is doubtful — its Greeks south- 
wards to the Greek reserve. If that happens, its bureaucratic 
international constitution might be gradually modified, so 
that it would become mure popular axid mure natxunal; 



! 
1 



Digitized by Google 



332 



MACEDONIA 



ultunatdy evolving Into a charter of a gamine antonomoiis 
state. The Turkish area seems to have no satisfactory 
future, unless after Abdul Hamid's deafli there should occur 
some revolution at Constantinople repeating Midhat Padsa's 
Coup it4tat under happier conditions. Albania, before many 
years have passed, will either be an Anstro-Italian protectorste 
or an ind^endent principality. But whatever the future 
may hold in reserve, there is some reason to hope that the 
evolution of the Balkan Peninsula may proceed from stage 
to stage without violence and without war — provided that 
the Powers can agree to isolate the Macedonian problem 

and to solve it upon international lines. 

• • • » • 

One contemplates such a solution as this with a sense 
tliat it is in itself as practicable as it is desirable. And yet 
the forces which make for it are feeble and those which 
oppose it deplr r ihlv powerful. We have to reckon as 
much with the tuni tiiv and indifference of the disinterested 
nations, as with the greed for territory of the two Eastern 
Empires. In theory I suppose there is now n consensus of 
opinion in England, France, and Italy that tlie one hope of 
a bloodless and humane solution rests on the slender pros- 
pect of a joint intervention undertaken by these three 
Liberal Powers. Austria is preoccupied by an internal 
crisis, Russia is broken by war and struggling to avoid 
revolution. And yet the certainty that neither of these 
Powers could offer any determined opposition to an initiatiw 
from the West, does not suffice to overcome the caution 
and inertia of the three peoples whose hands are free. 
There is too little to be gained by action, and even France 
under a Radical Government is content to fold her hands in 
face of the Macedonian anarchy, while her Ambassador 
threatens Abdul Hamid with the dire wrath of a humani- 
tarian Republic if he fails to buy from the Creosot forges^ 
the cannon destined to crush the last hopes of die Bul- 
garian race. Official France objects to Turidsh excesses 
only when they are perpetrated with Krupp guns. As for 
ourselves, while it is thou^t decent to profess a perfunctory 
sympathy with the victims of Turkish misrule, there is 



Digitized by GoogI< 



THE PROBLEM OF REFOKM 333 



always some reservation. It is said that the affairs of 
TurkLV arc after all !io concern of ours, and this ignorant 
repudiation sweeps away in one cold phrase the whole 
history of our action Uiroughout a century, in maintaining 
the integrity of Turkey and lending our fleets and our 
armies to perpetuate the Ottoman tyranny. We did not 
think that the affairs of Turkey were no concern of ours m 
1878, when wc tore up the Treaty of San Stefano and were 
ready to use *'tliL ships, the men/' and "the money too" 
in order to prevent the liberation of Macedonia by its 
incln<^inn in a free Bulgaria. The actual situation is of 
our making, and the Macedonians have endured a generation 
of oppression because we conceived that their emancipation 
was inconsistent with our own Imperial interests. There 
are other languid excuses, it is said that the Eastern 
Christians are unworthy of our interest beoiuse they quarrel 
among themselves. Is the armed camp which calls itself 
Western Christendom so entirely free from racial jealousies? 
Or else it is urged that these noisy little peoples should keep 
quiet and await our leisurely decision : the majesty of 
Europe cannot allow its hands to be forced^ But we know 
in our hearts that we should do nothing whatever, unless 
our hands were forced. Indeed^ the more we condemn the 
efforts of the Christians of Turkey to help themselves^ the 
more we emphasise our own responsibilities. 

There is, however, one aigwnent against action which 
deserves to be weighed. It is said that any intervention 
might precipitate a European war. The vague fear sounds 
alarming; but from wlttt quarter does the risk come? 
When Lord Salisbury decided that the butcher of the 
Armenians must be lit to the vengeance of Heaven, it was 
of Russian oppoation that we were afraid. We always are 
afrdd of Ruaria when it is proposed that we should do a 
disin t e r ested and generous action. We defy her only when 
we are engaged upon some forward move for our own 
aggrandisement like our last exploit in Thibet. But that 
particular men. ice is happily removed. No Ent^lish states- 
man wouid vcnlui'c to Day lo-day, that he shrank from a 
naval demonstration in the Mediterranean! because he 



Digitized by Google 



334 MACEDONIA 

dreaded what is left of the Roasiaa fleet No other Power 
posseaaes either the meana or the motive to resent the 
intervention of a Weatem coalition. Thaie i% I agrei^ 
every reason to handle Tnrkiej with tact and even with 
consideration. She could make no serions resistance to 
any European Power in her present condition, since she 
has no financial resources and no navy ; while her army, for 
all its dogi^jcd courage, is not very much better in point of 
training, urgarnscilioii, and intelligence than her civilian 
services. But if she were to be driven tu extremities, she 
would iinduLibtedly let loose the Albanims upon Mace- 
donia, and ni.iss:icre the populations wlioui we sought to 
liberate. For tliat reason it would be well to make demands 
which bhe Lould grant without abject humiliation, and to 
back them up at once with some prompt and unanswerable 
pressure, which would allow her no leisure to organise a 
systematic butchery. On the whole, one is inchned to 
suspect that this dread of war, so far as it is sincere, springs 
frnm precedents badly analysed. There have been wars 
enough in the Near East to make us cautious. But in both 
the modern instances the cause of war was not the action, 
but the inaction of the Concert. Had England sincerely 
supported the moderate demands for the autonomy of the 
Slav provinces put forward by Russia at the Conference of 
Constantinople in 1876, there is little doubt that Abdul 
Hamid must have yielded, and there would have been no 
Russo-Turkish war. Agjuik, had £urope occupied Crete 
promptly and proclaimed its autonomyi after the Canea 
massacres in 1896, as in the end she was obliged to do, it 
is fairly certain that Greece would not have conmiitted die 
chivaU'ous folly of rushing into war. It is the procrastina* 
tion and the indecision of the Concert which have endangered 
the peace of Europe in the past, and onleas the Western 
Powers are prepared to force the pace in the present crisis^ 
history is only too likely to repeat itself. There are after 
all two ideals of peaces a negative and a positive. The t 
negative conception tolerates any abomination and sanctifies ] 
things as they are^ provided only that the bloodshed does not 
come within the definition v^ich diplomacy recognises as 



Digitized by Google 



THE PROBLEM OF REFORM 335 



a state of formal war. Such a conception is a survival of 
the organised callousness of the Holy Alliance. The other 
conoeptton^ which excites the enthusiaam of every civilised 
democracy, is an ideal of co-operation. It looks for the 
gradual elimination of self-seeking and militarism, and it 
regards Europe as an association of nations animated by 
aims which a humane and enlightened individual would not 
be ashamed to avow. Of such an ideal the existence of an 
Oriental tyranny on the very highways of European culture 
and commerce is the crudest negation. From such a stand- 
point a state of anarchy is not a state of peace, and 
slaughter is no less horrible because the victims are not 
uniformed soldiers, but merely women and children. 

To refuse to act in face of such a situation, is to take the 
narrowest view of national interests and European prestige. 
In the French Chamber M. Delcass^, speaking for the 
Republic, has deliberately stated that the misgovernment of 
the Sultan leaves to his Christian subjects "no resource 
SiLvc insurrection." In Constantinople, Sir Nicholas 
O Conoi , addressing the Sultan in the name of England^ 
has declared in set terms that his misrule renders the 
existence of the Christians •'intolerable." It seems scarcely 
credible that two great Powers, enjoyintj the right of inter- 
vention and claiming the guardiansiiip of these same 
Christians, should hold such language and yet remain 
inactive. We have it in our power to do a good deed at 
a trivial cost to ourselves. To rescue two millions of 
miserable peasants from their daily purgatory, needs no 
greater effort than we expended to extort a petty debt from 
the coffers of Venezuela. For our pains we should have 
the knowledge that the dread of violence had passed from 
the life of a race which for five long centuries has tasted 
neither honour nor peace. In our own afiEairs it would be 
but the crisis of a season and the excitement of an hour. 
To the Macedonian villages it would mean the ending of a 
secular terror and the beginning of a new career. To the 
humblest cabin it would bring hope, and send free men 
with a new motive to their daily toil. Such an achievement 
a statesman might contemplate with a lofty pride— 4he pride 



33^ 



MACEDONIA 



which Goethe thought the best thing in human life. One 
thinks ol the supreme joy d the aged Faust when in his 
last momeot from the terrace of his castle, he watched his 
workmen completing the dyke that wrested from the sea 
new homes for the multitude^ and fresh fields lor the 
ploo^— 

*'SoIgIi tin Gvwimiiiel iii5chf Ich sebn 
Auf freiem Grund mit frcicm Volke stehn. 

Zum Augcnblicke dfirf ich sagen 
Verweile docb, du bi&t so schcm." 



L 




Digitized by Google 



INDEX TO NAMES 



For Subjects su 

A 

Abdul Hanii4 7.6^.6? (note), m 255, iro 
Adrianople (revolt in), I.s6-«;7. $cg Thrace 
Aladrn, Marquis, 286 
Albania, 88-qi, chapter viii. passim, 230 
Albanians, Ti 47-5° (brigandage), 81. 

88-91, and chapter viii. passim 
All Pasha of Jannina, 2, ^ 177-78, 221-22, 

Alliance IsraeliU, &2 
Aposkepo, 11-13 
Armensko (massacre in), i6q 
Arsof, 150 

Asen (Vlacho-Bulgarian dyinasty), Q6-7 
Austria, 29 ; Policy in Albania, 254, 

382-8S ; Claim in Macedonia, ^v3-</6 
Au8tro-Ru»sian Reforms, 13 s, .y)i-4 

(first scheme), 32 (note), 30.S-ii. 

(second scheme) 



B 

Baktiar Pasha, 154 

Uasbi-ba/ouk (term explained), 145 

Basil BulgaroktoDos, 96 (note) 

Bckta3hi«4, 67, 243-48 

Berlin (Treaty of), 20, 114 

Bibk Society, Bntitth and Foreign, 3.S4 

Bogdanes, 253 

Bogomiltsm, 67, 99 

Boletinax, 271 

Bosnia, 316-17 

British policy, 298, ^19^ 332 stqu., see 

Lansduwnc 
British trade, 293 

Z 



Table of Contents 

» 

Bulgaria. Influence in Macedonia, toi-5 ; 
Attitude towards RevuluUonary Com- 
mittee, 1 18-21 ; Involved in Fate of 
Macedonia, 318-20 

Bulgarians. Origin, 55^ Empire, q6-o, 
locji (note) ; Laiiguage, lof-a ; Schools 
and Church, see Exarchate ; Bulgarian 
Movement, see chapter v. passim ; Feud 
witli Greeks. 72, rag, 20f>-i8 ; Relations 
with Vlachs, 185-86, 189 

Bulgstfophone Greeks, igg 

C 

Castoria, 12, 14, 83, 101-04 
Castoria (Archbishop of), 14, L5. 147. 

i<>^-Q4. 217 
Ca»tnot, George, see Scanderbeg 
Castriot, John, 232 
Catholic Sisters, 222 
Catholic Uniate Church, 73 
au-istopborides, Constantinc, 254 
Crete, Q (note), 17 (note), 2^ 218-xo. 337 

(note) 

D 

Dibra, 49^ 269, 2&1 
Djacova, 263, 264, 266-67 
Doiran, 140 
Dounnic, 84 
Dushan, 97^ 274 
Djmibeni, 

E 

Edhem Pasha, 8 

337 



INDEX TO NAMES 



Eg}T* i- (note) 

England ;> attilutie, 3t)2, set British 

Exarchate, 2ii 11S-16 



F 

Faik Bey Konitxa, 25^ (note) 
Ferdinand, Prince, 121 (note) 
Ferixovitch, 261 



G 

Ghei^s, S61 Oil chapter viit. passim 
Ghica, Prince Albert, 2fi6 
Giorgis, General de, 306, 309 
Gipsies, 8l &^ 
Goltz Pasha, Von der, 23 
Gora, 27s 

Greeks, 2i Mi 9l-S. ioS-7. 12^-24, 
I2t>-33t chapter vii. passim; Greek 
bands, 214-18 ; Greek Church, uc 
chapter iii. passim and 196 ; Greek 
language, 204-9, 251-52 ; Greeks and 
Albanians, i&i ; Greek influence in 
Epinis, :::^o, 278 ; Greeks of the Isles* 
218-iQ ; Greeks and Vlacha, 181-90, 
198. 215 and (note), 21& (note), see 
under Bulgarians, Castoria (Archbishop 
oi), and Hellenism 
Gregorius, Metropolitan of Mnnastir, 66 
Groueff, Damian, 115, 1^0, lOo. 171-72 
(note) 



H 

Hahn, Von, 252 (note), 354 

Haireddin, Bimbashi, 145. tbo 

Hamid, see Abdul 

Hellenism, 122. 1^2. 194 sequ, 

Hilmi Pasha, Hussein, 12, 14, i^, 30^ 281 

n8. 141. UP 
Hydriotes, 22z 



I 

Ismail Bey, 9 (note) 
Ipek, 26^-64 

Italy and Albania, j.sq. 262. sg-j 



I 

Jacova, see Djacova 

Tnni<5sarie??. v. 344 and (note) 
Jannina, itf Alt Paskhi, Koumanian Con- 
sulate, iM 
Jews, 26, Bz-S 



K 

Kailar. 88 
Kallay, Von, 317 
Kilki»h, 22 
Kirk-killisse, 156 

Kitchevo or Kirchovo, 43, 150. i si (note) 
Klisaoura or Vlacho-klissura, 34^ 1^2. 154, 

126^122 
Koritza, 67^ 248-62 
Kossenets, ihl 

Kossovo, 92i J 00. 264. see " Old Servia " 

Kruchevo, LSo^ LS4i I7<>. 122 

Knisje, 38, LSa 

Kuklisb, 312 

Kyrias, Gerassimo. 257 

Kyrias, Miss, 257-58 



L 

Lansdowne, Marquis of, 292-93, 309 
Latin Tongue in Macedotiia, ^2, 179 
Levantine, 33 
Loxancheff, 150 



11 

Macedonia, the term, 6, 210 (note) 
Macedonians, who are they ? ini 
Macedonians, ancient, 51, 194, 22& 
Malesia, 46, 4^ 
Malko-Tirnnvo, i^jfy-^y 
Margariti, Apostolo, 187-88 
Mavrovo, 46, 48 
Messiah, see Sabatai 
Michaelides. M., 2S& 
Midhat Pasha. 2, 12S 
Milan. King, 104. jt/j 
Millet (term explained), ^ 
Mirdites, 2^4. 237 

Missions, Protestant, 24 (note), se€ also 
Bible Society 



INDEX TO NAMES 



339 



Mitrovitza, 367 
Mitylcne, 17^ 310 
Mu^illa, 143-44 
Mohamedana, see Moslems 
Mokreni. 3l.S-l6 

Monasttr. description nf town, 12 ; mas- 
sacre, (note) ; rising in, 148. sequ. 

Morlachs, 179 

Moschopolis, 12$, 35i 

Mnstcms, are tlie)" fanatical ? 25-6 ; why 
Albaiii^ins bcc;inic, 34J ; race and reli- 
gion, 23j 8{>-i ; claims of, 381. 333 

Miitindjirs, 80 

Mur£»teg scheme, 39 (note), 305 sequ. 



N 

N'asir Pasha, 15^ 
Neocazi (massacre at). 160 
Neveska, lSj, 154, 176 



O 

Ochrida, ^ 32,49. Jfi, 96,99, 109 (note B), 

"Old Servia" (Kossovu), 49, 90. g7. 372, 

--74-77. 1^.0 
Oni.tr Kuchdi Pasha, 148, 154 
Orthodox Church, see chapter ili. passim 
Osmanli, see Turks 



P 

Pallis, A., asA 

Parfja, 230 

Pswsvan O^lou Pasha, of Widin, 3 
Phanar, 3 (note), 195 
Pindus, gg 
Piflodcri, 174 

Pomacks, Sii (note), 156, 331 
Prizrend, 262 s«7w. 
Pr(>te3t.-ints, 5C« Missions 

Psictuiri, M., 2q6. 208 



R 

Ragusa, 100, 2^ 
Recbid I^uha, 4 



Resna, 

Romaic. JO4-9 

Kuman Colonies, Ql^ l&i 

Romn Millet, 63-63 

Roumanian Propaganda, 187-190. iiA 

(note), 287 (note) 
Rosikovsky, M., 157 

Russia, see Austro-Russian reforms; 
influence of, 19, ^ 64, lao-ai ; re- 
newed interest oi. in Macedv>nia, 291 ; 
policy in Macedonia, 2(/)-3oo ; her rule 
undesirable, 315-30 ; officers, 309 ; 
murdered consuls, 157-58 

Rycaut, Sir Paul, 2 



8 

Sabatai Sevi. 84-5 

Salon ica, 83, 8^ ; outrages, l3'>-37 

Salonica, Vali nf. 43 

Samuel, Tsar, 96 

San Stefano, loO^ 114 

Sarafof, 73, irg, 150, i6q, 171-72 (note) 

Scanckrbcg, 231-32 

Scutari, legal code of, 263 

Servians, 72^ 97-105. 132, 230, 278, 318- 

320 ; see '* Old Servia." 
Shahin, 225 
Simeon, Tsar, 96 
Slav dialects. 85 
Slavs, pr iiiiitive, 94. 99 
Smerdesh, 50^ 1 44-47 
Smilovo, I SO 
Sorovitch, 

Stambulotf, 11^ 210. 2JJ (note) 
Suli, 22a 

Sultan, see Abdul Hamid 
SvetkufiF, 1 14^ 142-44 



T 

TatarcheflF, Dr., 115 
Tcb.ak;iIaroff, 14S. iSo. IhS. 
Theodore of Elbasan. 252-53 
Thrace, 156-57. ; Adrianople 
Thracians, ancient, ^ 
Tirnovo, 97 

Tosks, 86j 91 ; chapter viii. passim 
Tournefort, 72 (note) 
Treska, 55-56 
Tricoupis, 174, ill 



340 



INDEX TO NAMES 



Tzoncheff, General, tu. 171-72 (note) 
Turks, the race, cliapLer L pammt ; Ho~8a ; 
Osmanli settiements, 87-S8 ; the term, 
333-33 : " Young Turks," ig, 247^ 056 

O 

Uniate, su Catholic 
Uskub, 85 

V 

Vincent dc Paul, Sisters of, 22j 



Vlacbs, %ee chapter vi. pasiim, 85, 86.- 2L 
343 ; early state, (aotc). Church, 
23 : in Epirus, 330 ; Albanian propa- 
ganda, 287 (note) : see Greeks and 

Vlachs 

W 

WaUachians, see Vlachs 
Y 

Yankoff, Coionel, 121 (note) 
Z 

Zagoritchani, 316-17 



UNWni BHOTHEBS, T.ntwun, XHK PREaS. WO&IKO AMD X^KDOM. 



A CATALOGUE OF BOOKS 
PUBLISHED BY METHUEN 
AND COMPANY: LONDON 
36 ESSEX STREET 
W.C. 



CONTENTS 















UMaOtJlwUm, . . . 


•r 


ftntlMrt TtWn, 




UtliiO«ldM». . . . 




Antiquary's Books, • • 


90 


Little Library, 


a? 


Arden Shakenpeare, 


30 


Little Quarto ShaWrapeare, 




B«ciaoer*s Books, . 


8< 


Miniature Library, 


n 




•t 


Osfovd BUofntiUft • 




Bycantioa Texts, . • • 


9X 


School Baamlnallea ftariat, 




Chorchman't Btble, . * 


92 


School H'stories, . . , 


a* 


ChurchfluuB's library, • • 


t» 


Testboolu of Science, > 




CiMHdottI TniMfliitloBity 




BlmplifUd Fvanch Tasta, . 




fihiMlfi vtMgtt « • • 


•s 


fliMiteid UfefNvyt • * « 




Commercial Series, 


«3 


Testbooka of Technology, . 


Si 


Connoisaetir's Library, 


as 


Handbooka of Theolog^y, 




library of Devouon, . 


*3 


Wcetminatar Commentaries, 


» 


UliMtetad PMkM LIknry df 








Plain and Coloured Boolc^ 


•4 






Junior Examination *iari<g, 


as 


Fiction, . . . , , 




Junior Sdtool-Books, . . 


16 


The SbUling Novels, . 


37 


LMdm ^ RcUffion, . 


a8 


Bodni for Boya and Oirla, 




LMto Um 8otte» . , 


flS 


N^wtoaf AImmo4m Diubm, 


m 


UMaBookaoo Art, . . 


il 




m 



MARCH 1907 



A CATALOGUE OF 

Messrs. Methuen'S 

PUBLICATIONS 



Colonial E^Uom «• piiWiih>rt of all MeHn. Mbtuubn's NoMb 
at « price abow aft ttli •■i iluil* •J M * *'* f«IHA«i 

IdUrature. These ara oiarked in the CatalogMk 

£gf circulation in the British Colonies and India. 

Ulfd^ represents Illustrated Pocket Library. 



Part I. — General Literature 



Abbot (Jacob). See Lutle Blue Books. 

Abbott (J. H. M. . Author of ' Tommy 
Cornstalk.' AN OUTLANDER Iff 
BliOI<AND: Bniic soms Imfuuionsof 



A Colenlal Bditioa U also published. 
AcatMCM. J.)> See Junior School Books. 
aSSS Pnui& JACK SPRATT. With S4 

Coloured Pictures. St^^Jtigmitdm^ a*. 
Adcney (W. P.X llfi«tt and 

Adeney. , . ^ 

yCMhylus. Sf Oaasical Tr t mi i nnw 

Ain*worth (W. H«rrly«iX^8at I.F.L. . 
AMerson (J. P.). MR. A.SQU1TH. With 
Portraits and Illustrations. Demy 8m. 

AldVsYiMet). MADAME C.EOFFRIN, 
HER SALON, AND HKR TIMES. 
With many I'urtraits and Illustrations. 
Second Editie>n. Df»t\ ivo. lai. i>d. tut. 
A Colonial Edition is :il ■> published. 
Alexander (WUIlam), D D., Archbishop 
^ ArmajL THOUGHTS A N j5 
COUNSELS OF MAMY TSARS. 
Demy i6ma. as. 6d. ^ . . 

Aiken (Henry). THK NATIONAL 
SPORTS OF GREAT BRITAIN. With 
descriptions in English and French. With 
SS Coloured Plates. Jteya/ Folio. Five 
SMwm net. The Plates can be bad 
■tcly in a Portfolia £3, 3*. n*t. 
lahoLP.L. ^ , ,^ u , 

Sec Textbooks of Technology. 
ABaaCJMiM* Sac Little Books on An. 
Altaii^BllQy)b F.S.A. See Antivwy'* 

Almack(B.). See little Booto on Art. 
Amherst (l-«»y). A 8KET C H O F 
EGYPTIAN HISTORY FROM THE 
EARLIEST TIMES TO TOB PRR- 
SENT DAY. With nunqr IlMlaMiaM. 

Dtmy 8wtf. rs. (>d. net. 

Anderson (F. M.). THE STORY OF THB 
BRITISH £M]PIR£ FOR CHILDREN. 
-. . cir.lwk •* 



Plxaminer to Tyondoa 



NOUVELLK GRAM.MAIRE 



Anderson (J. q.J. B. A. 
UniverMty, 

FR.\NCA1SE. Cr. Bvo. at. 
EXfiRCICES DE GRAMMAIRK FRAN- 

9A1SB. Cr.9m. x&ML 
Andrewes (Bishop). PRSCES PRI< 
VAi AE. Edited, with NoCei, by ^F. E . 
Brioktman, M>A^ofZ^MyiiOHBtOlto^ 

Cr. Sva. 6t. 

Anglo-AiMtraliJui. AFTKR-OLOW MB* 
BORIES. Cr. &V0. 6$, 
A Colonial Edition is also published. 
__THE NICOMACHEAN 
[te& Edited, «kh M Itwini line 
and Notes, by JOHH BBMSTs Mii.. Pro. 
fessor of Greek at St. Aadnnra. Citrnftr 
isrtu. Demy 8iv. tor. td, met. 
Asfaton (R.). See Little Bloe Books. 
Atkins (H. a.). S^' I 1 r J Biographies. 
AtUMWiCM.). J£K£MYBENTHAM. 

AtUaMB (T. D.). A SHORT HISTORY 
OF ENGLISH ARCHITECTURE. 
With over 300 Illustrations. StemdSJUlim 
Fcnp. 8fW. 3X. bd. net. 

A (;L0SSARY OF TERMS USED IN 
ENGLISH ARCHITECTURE. Uefr 
trated. Stetmd JUtUtm, Flti^ 9m, 
31. (mL met. 

Auden (T.), M.A, F.S.A. See Ancient atio. 
AttreUm (MarcM) and EpictetM. 

WORDS OF THE ANCIENT WISE: 
Thoughts from. Edited by W. H. Dw 
Rouss, M.A., Litt.0. Aes^tM. 3«.ddL 

tift. See also Standard Librar>-. 
AtlSten (Jane). See Little Library and 
Standard Library. 

(Pratids). See Little Library and 
Standard Library. 

liM-Pow^ (R. S. S.), Major-GcneraL 
THE DOWNFALL OF PREMPEH. A 
Diary of Life in Ashanti, 1895. I II ustrated. 
— ' Letrfi Cr. loo. tt. 



Third EdMom. Letr^ 



Digitized by Google 



GSMBBAL LiffBRAmS 



THE MATABELE CAMPAIGN, i%fi. 
With nearly loo Illustrations. Ftmrth 

Edition. Lar^t Cr. 8fo. 6f. 
A Colonial Kdition i* aljio published. 
Bailey (J. C), M. A. See Cowper. 

Jl^ Sm Jamoc Kawina- 



Baker (Julian L.KFJ.C»F.C8. 8m Books 

on Hviiincsi. 

Balfour (a raham). THE LIFE OF 
ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON. JmW 
Editiim. A R ttimimmiCii^t^ ttMtt i . 

Crvttm Sw. ts. 
A Colonial Edition i% also published. 
Ballard (A.), U.A., LL.B. See Antiquary's 
Books. 

B«Itar(S. B.). Se«CamBi«rdalS«fa%_ 
Biuika (BUnbaOi UX THBAUTa 

BIOGRAPUV or A 'NEWSPAPER 

GIUL.' StumdEiBiUm, Cr.9v0. 6s. 
A Colontal Edition is also published. 
Barham (R. H.). See Little Library. 
Barinr (The Hon. Maurice). WITH 

THE RUSSIANS IN MANCHUKIA. 

Third Kdili.-n. !\-»!y Brv 7^. f,,,'. ntt 
A Colonial Edition i» also pul lished. 
Baringr-Qould (S.). Illh LIKE OF 

NAPOLEON BONAPARTE. With over 

^50 lllusir.itiuns in the Text, and 12 Photo- 
jgravure Plates. Gilt to*. Larr* quarto. 361. 
THE TRAGEDY OF THE C.ESARS. 

With numerous lUostiatiooa fron Busts, 

Gems, Cameos, etc. SiaAMittlmu Migml 

tMk aof. 6d. tut. 
A BOOK OF FAIRY TALES. With 

naaMCOM lUotUations by A. J. Gaskin. 

TkitiKihkm. Cr.iva. Buckram. 6t. 
O LD BMOysa FAIR Y TAL KS. With 

MBMRW ufeMBWMM BV F* D> BfeBVORD. 

TkMEOHtm. Cr. 8fw. Bmttmm. te. 
THE VICAR OP MORWEMBTOW. 
viiMi Editioo. With a I 
Edition. Cr. 9v». ys. 6d. 

A POOK OF DARTMOOR: A Descriptive 

and Historical Sketch. With Plant and 

numerous lUi 

Cr. 8fw. 6*. 
A BOOK OF DEVON. 

Second Edition. Cr. %vo. 6t. 
A BOOK OF CORNWALL. 

.Second Edition. Cr. 8cw. 6*. 
A BOOK OF NORTH 

trated. Cr. Saifc 6t. 

A BOOR OF SOOTH WALI8. 

Cr. 8fv. 6t, 
A BOOK or BRITTANY. 

A BOOK or IBB MYIU 

A CaldiM BdMea b alio p^bblMd. 
A BOOK or THE RHINBl rkOM Cfave 
to Mainz. Ulastratod. St e tmd Sdltt0H. 

Crcnvn Zz'O. tt. 

A C'olnnial E<!ition U also uublished. 
A BOOK OF THE PYRENEES. With 
a4 lliustnuloos. Crown Ji^ 6t. 



WALM. Dbs 



Cr. 



A BOOK or GHOSTS. With 8 Hhntra. 
tioos by D. Murkav Smith. Second Edi' 
tiou. Cr. ivo. 6j. 

OLD COUNTRY LIFE. With 67 Illusira. 
tions. Fi/t A Edition. Lar,;e Cr . tt. 

A GARLAND OF COUNTRY SONG: 
English hollc Soups with their Traditional 
Mclrdir-s. Collected and arraoged hy S> 
Ha KKM. Gould aad H. F. SwrtAMib 

Demy ^to. 6s. 
SONGS OF THE WEST: Folk Songs of 
Devon and ComwalL Collected from the 
Mouths of the People ByS. Ba«ikg^oulo, 
M.A.,and H. FlbbtwoodShbppard, M.A. 
New and Revised Edition, under the muMcal 
adUonhip of Cacu. J. SiiAar* Frindpal «f 



tha Hampftaad CooMmMira. Lm g tMm^ 

a4ommof^vurskry songs and 

RH YM ES. Edited by S. Baxino-Govu>, 
and Illustrated by the Binnighaai Att 
School. A NwmMMUm, Lm^Cr, Iw. 

ij. bd. nft. 

STRANGE SURVIVALS AND SUPER. 
STITIONS. mrd Edition, Cr. Stv. 

VO^RKSHIRE ODDITIES AND 
STRAN(;K EVENTS. Arto amdMmtMd 
Edition. Cr. Bro. a/. 6,/. net. 
See also Little Guides. 

f Aldf«« P.X Sot Taatbooka of 

Mogy. 

Barker (E.), M.A. (Late) Fellow of Merton 
College, Oxford. THE POLITICAL 
THOUGHT OF PLATO AND ARIS- 
TOTLE. J>^m^ 8(w. lot. 6d. not. 

Bamea (W* B»X Dklk 8m GMrabMS^ 
Bible. 

Baraett(Mra. P. A.). SaaLkllalAnry. 

Baron(R. R. N.). M.A. FRENCH PROSE 
COMPOSITION. .Seccfui Kdition. Cr.SM 
ar. td. Key, -^t. net. 

See also Junior School liooks. 

Barroa (H. M.). M.A.. Wadham Colleee, 
Oxford. TEXTS FOR SRRMON& With 
a Preboa br Ouon Seorr Rmxamb. 

Cr. %vo. 3*. td. 

Bartholomew (J. 0.), F.R.S.E. See C. G. 
Robertson. 

BaaUble (C. P.). M.A. THE COM- 
MERCE OF NAnomL f*mHkMd, 

Cr. %vo. *t. 6d. 

Baatlan (H. CharltoaX M.D., F.R.S. 
THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE. Illus- 
trated. Dtmjf 8rv. 71. td. net. 

BatJOB (Mra. SteplM^ A CONCISB 
HANDBOOK OrGAU>Bll FLOWBM. 
FtM^ Sew. w. 6d, 

Birttaa (Larlnr W.V 1%-D^ 8.T.D. THE 
HEBRBWPROPHET. Cr.Bw. 3s.6d.nrt 

Bayley (R. CblldV THE CONIPLETE 
PHOTOGRAPHER. With over 100 
Illustrations. Demy Bpo. loi. bJ. net. 

Baard <W. S.). EASY EXERCISES IN 
ALGEBRA. Cr. »tw. is.6d. See Junior 



-''d • '-J ^j^-'-' 



CATAL( 



BUMTlliUi £dit«d by J. Otho Pagkt, 
and nhiitmtad by Gw U. jAiXAKOb &«mn/ 

Beckford (WmhunX Se« litde Libnrr. 
Beecblair (H. C.), M.A., Cumq of West. 

minster. See Libnu^ of Devotion. 
B«rbie< Harold). MASTER WORKERS. 

nio»tnted. Dtm\ Ts.fxi.net. 
Bahmen (Jacob). I'lAl.Or.UES ON THE 

SUPERSENSUAL LIKE. KUu-l \,y 

Bbknard Holland. Fcap. Sro. -i,s. t4. 
Mloc (Hilaire), M P. PARIS. Second 

Edition. Wiih Maps and Illiutration^. 

Cr. Rvo. 6t. 
HILLS AND THE SEA. Stcond Edition. 

Cr9w» Svo. 6s. 
BaUot(H. H.L.),M.A. THE INNER AND 

MIDDLE TEMPLE. With numerous 

liltistrations. Crown %tfc. 6s. net. 
BMUMtt (W. n.X M.A. A PRIMER OF 

THE BIBLE. TAird Edition. Cr. SfA 

BMBsttCW. H.)«tMl AdcmyCW.FA A 

BIBLICAL INTRODUCnON. Amtk 

Editim Cr. 8t«A f$.6d. 
mmam. (ArdiMakop) GOD'S BOASD: 

Oo— MMiaa Addwwei. Femfi, Scw. ^> 

mt 

Bencon (A. C\ MJL Sm OM Ha* 

grapbies. 

Bmmoo (R. M.). THE WAY OF HOLI- 
NESS: a Devotional Commentary on tbe 
119th Psalm. Cr. 8t'0. 51. 

Bernard Cfi. R.), M.A.. Canon of Salisbury. 
THE ENOLtSH SUMOAY. /SnM^a*». 
IX. ed'. 

Bertouch (Baroaess de). THE LIFE 
OF FATHKR IGNATU'S. Illustratea. 
Demy Sfi'. lor. 6./. ntt. 

Baructa (A. de>. See Cl;issic<; of Art. 

•atham- Edwards (M.). HOME LIFE 
IN FRANCE. Illustrated. Fourth and 
Cktm^r Edition. Crown Zvo. 6j. 
A Colotual EUitiwi italso poblisbod. 

Battaane-Baker (J. P.), MX 8MHnd> 
books of Tbeology. 

Bides (M.). See Byzantine Texts. 

BI»ga(C. R. D.), D. D. See Churchman's Bible. 

Bindley (T. HerbertX B.D. THE OECU- 
MENICAL DOCUMENTS OF THE 
FAITH. With Introductions and HkDm, 
Sfcmut EJitimt, Cr. ^vo. ts. net, 

Btana (H. B.>. THE LIFE OF WALT 
WHITMAN. niMrtMliil Jimtfim 
for. 6d. mtL 
A Colonial BdlilaB hafcp wiWIihad 

Blnyen (Unnw^^TRft l>BATH OP 
ADAM.ANDOnBKPOBMI. Cjr.tM. 

v. 6d. net. 

See also W. Bh^ke. 
BImatlnKi (Ethel). See Little Books on 
Art. 

Blackmantlc (Bcrnnrd). .See I. P. I^ 

BUIr (Robert) SccI.F.U 

BUke (William^. THE LETTERS OF 
WILLIAM I'.LXKK, TOt.FriiKR with a 
Lira av Vumosmkm. Tatmam. 



fron Aa Original Mantzaaipta, wi& aa 
IntroiluoriMild Netw, by AaonaawO. 
B. Rtnsiu. With n VOmmalmm, 

ILLU^RATlTOiS OF THE BOOK OF 

{OB. With a Geoeral louodoctioo by 
.AWREN r PrvvoN. Quarto. *is. mgL 
See aUa l.P.L. and Liitte Lit 
Blazland (B.Jb MJL 8ai 

Devotion. 
Bloom (J. HarveyX M.A. 
SPEARE'S GARDEN, 
/"crt/. Bvo. y. 6d. ; leaf Iter, , 
S'c also Antiquary's Books 
Blouet ( Henri). See Be^nner's Books. 
Boardman (T. H.), M.A. See Textbooks 
of Science. 

Bodla3r(J.&caAatbaraf'F^aaoe.' THE 



SHAKE. 
II 



OF EDWARD YIL 



King. 

Body (Qeorre), D.D. THE SOUL'S 
PILGRIMAGE : Devotion.il Readii^ 
from his writings. Selected by J . H. 
B.D., F.R-S.E. PettBvc. as. 6d, 

Bona (Cardinal). See Library of] 

Boon (P. C.\ See Commercial Scries. 

Berrew (Oemrge). See Little Library. 

Bm Rltzena). AGRICULTURAL 
ZOOLOGY. Translated by J. R, Aiss- 
WORTH Davis, M. A. With 155 Ilhutratiaaa. 
Cr. 8a«. Third Edition, v. td, 

Battlnjr (C OA &A. E ASY O & KB K 
EXERCISES. Cr. 8m. a*. Eat aha 
Junior Examinatioo Seriea. 

Boaltlne (W.) TASSO AND HIS TIMES. 

Boulton CE. S.\ M.A. GEOMETRY ON 
MODERN LLVES. Cr. 8cw». «. 

Bonlton (WlllUm B.). THOMAS 
GAINSBOROUGH With 40 Illustra- 
tions. .Second Ed. Demrifo. ys.6d.net. 

SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS, P.R.A. With 
413 lllustratinns. I}emyit\>. yt. 6d. net. 

BowdenfE. M.). THE IMITATION OF 
BUDDHA: Being Quoutioaa ffoai 
Buddhist Literature for <»ch Day la dM 
Year. Fi/iA Edition. C>. i6i(M. »s.6d. 

Boyd-Carpeater (Martarat). 

CHILD IN ART. IIGuiMlad. 

Edition. Larre Crtmm iMW 6fc 
Boyle (W.). CHRISTMAS ATTHBEOO 

W«* Vama hf W. BmsMd a« r 

micuiea oy n* o* ivi 

\6imo. 9S. 

Brabant (P. Q.), M. A. See Little Ouidan 

Bradlav (A. Q,} ROUND ABOUT Wl LT- 
SHIRE. With JO Illustrations of w iiich 
«4.'ire in 'l.'ur byT.C.GoTcH. (>. Ht-.-^. 'j. 

Bradley (J. W',). See Little Foots on .\rt. 

Braid (James) and Others i.R£.\T 
cor I F.RS IN THE MAKING. I'.j 
1 hii ty-Four Chatntiions. Edited, with aa 
Intr>iuctiou, by Henkv Lfach. With 34 
Portraits. Demr ivo. 'j. t^. neS. 



Digitized by Google 



Gbnxral Lttbraturb 



5 



Brallsford (H. N.). MACEDONIA: 
ITS RACES AND ITS FUTURE. 
Illustrated. Dtmy^vo. iit. dd. rut. 

Brodrick (Mary) and Morton (Anderson). 
A CONCISE HANDBOOK OF EGYF- 
TIAN AUCIMEOLOOY. lOntnMd. Cr. 

Brook* (E. E.), B.Sc. See Textbooks of 
Technology. 

Brooks (E.W.)« Se^ Ilv7.i.ulne Texts. 

Brown (P. H.;^ LL.l'., I rascr Profeisor of 
Ancient (Scottish) History .-»t tlie l^^r.ivcrsity 
of Eilinburgli. SCOTLAND IX THK 
TIME OK QUEEN MARY. Demy Ivo. 
jj, id, tut. 

Brown (S. B.\ M.A., Camb., B.A., B.Sc., 
Loodon ; Senior Science Master at Uppios* 
h—Scbooi. A PRACTICAL CHEMIS. 
TRY NOTE.BOOK FOKMATRICULA* 
TICK AND ARMY CANDIDATES. 
Easier Kxperimrnt* oh thk Commonsr 

Browne (Sir Thomas). See StanditJ 

Browneh (C. L.). THE HEART OF 
JAPAN. Illustrated. Third S4tii$m, 
Cr. 8rv. (^r ; ahoDtmyZvc. 6d. 

Urowiiing (Robert). See Little Library. 

Huckland ( Francis T.\ CUKIOSri IKS 
OF NATI KAL HISTORY. Illustraicd 
by H. li. Neilson. Cr. 8tv. xt. 6d. 

BucktOD (A. M.) THE BURDEN OF I 
ENGELA : a RaltacI Epic. Second Editian. 
Cr. 8t'o. -^s. td. titl- 

KINGS IN BABYLON. A Drama. Crtwn 
%V0. I/, tut. 

EAGER HEART: A MystsiyPkr. Fifth 

EdiHmu Cr»dit0, u.mU. 
Bttdm (B. A. WallU). THE GODS OF 

THE EGYPTIANS. With over loo 

Coloured Pktes and many Illostnttions. 

Tw0 Volmmau Rttfrnl 8cv. Lx, xi. tut. 
Bulsson(J.C.P«XDiB. SasCtanhMa's 

Bible. 

BulstCH. Msssac). THE MOTOR YEAR 
BOOK. AND AUXOMOBi LISTS' 
ANNUAL FOR 1906. Dttm^Ut, ft,6d. 

DM*/ 

BoU (PaalX Army Chaplaia. GOD AND 
OUR 80LDISR& JteMf M^Mm 

BnUeyCMlss). See Ladv Dtlke. 
Banvan (John). THE PIIX;RIM'S PRO. 
GkKSS. Edited, with an Introdu' ti' i., 
by C H. Firth, M.A. With 39 Illii-.ir... 
tMBS by R. Anmng Bell. Cr. Zvo. 6t. 



?>ee «Ko I.: 



»r.iiy 



of Devotion and 



• l.ird Library. 
Uurch(0. J.). M A . F.R.S. AMANUAL 
OF ELECTRICAL SCUNGB. Hhs* 
fTateci. Cf . Hr'(j. oj. 
Burgess (Qelett). COOPS AND HOW TO 
l;K rHi:>L Illuurated. Small t^to. 6s. 
Burke (Hdmund). See Standard Libr.vy. 
Burn (A. 8.1 D.D., Rector «f " 
and Prcboidary of LicbfieUfe'.. 

«f UNokfli'' 



E», CO. RECORDS AND 
NCR WUh a Portnut by 
MSB. Cr»9m» F0t$rikmmd 



Bum (J. H.), B.D. THE CHURCH- 

MAN'S TREASURY OF SONG. 

Selected and Edited by. Fcafi ivo. ys. td. 

mtU See also Library of Devotion. 
Baraand (flkP* C). RECORDS AND 

REMINlSCKK 

H. T. HnKOwnk 

Ckmf*r Rditlmt. U, 

A Colonial Edition b alse Mt 

Bums (Robert). THE POEtIS Of, Edited 

byANDRBwLANoandW. A.CRAIGIB. With 

Portrait. Third Edition. Demy Zvo, gilt 

Burnside (W. P.). M.A. OLD TESTA- 
MENT HISTORY FOR USE IN 
SCHOOLS. Seccnd Edition. Cr. %vo. 

3S. U. 

Btirton (Alfred). See I P. L. 
Bassell (F. W.). D.D., Fellow and Vice- 
Principal of IJr.asenose College, Oxford. 
CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY AND SO- 
CIAL PROGRESS: The Bampton 
Lectures for 1905. Demy ivo los. 6d. tut. 
Btttler (JoMBhX See Standard LibraiT. 
Caldecott (SiMX D.D. ~ " ' 



I OX S.X BMteMierof IfaeKor- 
shI School. EdiManh. TEST CARDS 
IK lUCUD AND KlXStXkk. latlwee 
psdwtt of 40^ with Answers, ix. each. Or 
Bi three Books, orice *d., n/., and yd. 
Cambridge (Ada) [Mrs. Cross]. THIRTY 
YEARS IN AUSTRALIA. Demy 8tv. 
7*. 6</. 

Canning (George). See Little Library. 
Capev (E. F. HT). See Oxford ~ 
Careless (John). See I. P. L. 



Cartyle (Thofnas). THE FRENCH 
REVOLUTION. Edited by C R. L. 
Fletcher, Fellow of Magdalen Collie, 
Oxford. Three I'elmmes. Cr. dvo. tSs, 

THE LIFE AND LETIERS OF OLIVER 
CROMWELL. With an InttodncUon 
hf C H. FiKTR» M.Am luid KoMs and 
AppsadicM bjr Mis* & C hotUM, Tknt 
VHmmtt, JJhitr tsw. zSfc mtf, 

Carlyle(R. M. sod A. J.X ILA. SseLMdm 
of Religion. 

Channer (C. C.) and Roberts (M. B.). 
L.ACEMAKING IN THE .MIDLANDS, 
P.\ST AND PRESENT. With 16 fuH- 
p.igc lllu^ti.itinns.. Cr. Bzv. as. 6d. 

Chapman (S. J.). See Books on Busmesis. 

Chatterton (Thomas). Sec Standard 
Library. 

ClieinterfleId(Lord^TH£ LETTERS OF, 
Bdilsd* with an Introduc- 



TO HIS SON. 
tioB bf CL 
CsLTiRor. 



d Noiss bf A. 

r. Cr.tM. ft. 



Chesterton ra.K.\ CHARLES DICKENS. 
With tw o l'ortr.j!:s in photogravure. FoMrth 
Edition. Peiny 'i- o. Jt, 6d. net. 
A Colonial Edition is also published. 

Chllde (Charles P.), B.A., I .R.C.S. THE 
CONTROL OF A SCOURGE: Oa, 



MESSR& M£THUKII'S CATALOGUE 



CferlstiM (F. W.). THE CAROLINE 

ISLANDS. With innny llliiMr.. lions and 
Maps. Dfiny iii'O. i-j. f-.J. ntt. 

Cicero. See Classical Tr.m'-lationiv. 

Clarkc(F. A.), M.A. See Leaders of Religion. 

Ckinjeii(aeorKe), A.R.A., ILW.S. AlMS 
AND IDEALS IN ART : Eight Lectures 
delivered to the Students of the Royal 
Academy of Arts. With 33 Illustrations. 
StCffnd EditicH. Large Post %vo. y. tut. 

SIX LECTURES ON PAINTING. First 
Stritt. With 19 UliutratioDS. Third 
Edition, Lar^e Post Bvo. ys» 6d» m*L 

ClMther (A. L.). See WagMb 

Clinch (0.). See Little G^te 

Gtoagh (W. T.). See Jorfor S«M Books 
•ad Textbooks of Science. 

ClMWtoa(T. S.X M.D., F.R.S.E., Lecturer 
on Meaul Dioeues la the Univonttjr of 
BfialwiXli. THE RYGIBNS OF 
MIND. Whh 10 lUostratiofla. Tkird 
EditiM. Demyivt. jt. 6d. nti. 

Coast (W. a.), n.A, EXAMINATION 
PAPERS1NVKRC.il. Cr. 8w». 

Cobb(T.). See Little Dlue L oks. 

Cobb (W. P.), M.A. THE BOOK OF 

p' IT I iihoriwwMiMji rumyn* 

los. 6d. net. 
Coleridge (S. T.). POEMS OF. Sel cied 
and Arranged by ARTHUR Symons. With 
a photogravwo VraMiviMib Feafi, 9mo. 

7S. (x/. Met. 

Colllngwood (W. G.). M.A. THE LIFE 
OF JOHN RUSKIN. With Portraits. 
Si-vth Ei/itioH. Cr. Zvo. is. (>d. net. 

CollinA (W. e.), M.A. See Churchman's 
Library. 

Colonna. HVPNKROTOMACHIA POLI- 
PHILI UHI HUM.\NA O.MNIA NON 
NISI SOMNIUM ESSE DOCET 
ATQUE OBITER PLURIMA SCITU 
SANE QUAM DIGNA COMM&MO- 
RAT. An odidoo liaUtod to ago c op i w on 
bandmadojiaper. A/Xi. jCs. 



j(Wlllui> SoeLP. 
C w m§ OtM. THE MIRROR OF 
THE SEAt metaories and Imprcanoas. 

TAird Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6s. 
Cook (A. M.X M.A..andMarchant(C. E.\ 

MA. PASSAGES FOR UNSEEN 
TRANSLATION. Selected from Greek 
and Latin LiierattoOt TAird MMfm. 

Cr. 8rv. V. 6</. 
LATIN PASSAGES FOR UNSEEN 
TRANSLATION. Third F.dition. Cr.Zin. 

1.. o./. 

Cooke-Taylor (R. W.). THE FACTORY 
SYSTEM. Cr. S.-,'. us. bd. 

Corelli (Marie). 1 HE PASSING OF THE 
G RE AT QUE KN . Second F.d. Fcaf. ^to. is. 

A CHRISTMAS GREETING. Cr. ^to. is. 

Corkran (Alice). See Little Books on Art. 

Cotci (Everard). SIGNS AND POR- 
TENTS IN THE FAR EAST. With 
Illustrations. Demy %vfi. is. 6d. net. 

Cotea(Rooenuiry). DANTE'S GARDEN. 
With a FnoSHBiaoa. Secmd JUUitm, 



BIBLE FLOWBlt& Whk * 

and Plan. Fcap.%o». v.9d,mtL 
Cowley (Abraham). See Little Library. 
Cowper (William), THE POEMS OF. 

Edited with an Introduction and Notes by 
J. C. P.Aii.EY. M..\. Illvisir.-»ied, including 
two unpub!i>hpd designs by William 
Blakk. De"'-\ -- los- 6J. net. 
Cox (J. Charles), LL.D., F.S.A. Sec Little 
Guides, ThtAtiqpwqr'a D eo fci, — il < iiiriit 
Cities. 

Cos (Harold), r..\.. M.P. LAND 
NATIONALISATION AND LAND 
TAXATION. Sectmd MdUm tmf m d 

Cr. 8w». 3^. 6</ net. 
Crabbe (George). See Little Library. 
Cralgle(W. A.). A PRIMER OF BURNS. 

Cr. '■:•.■■>. 3<. td. 
Cralk (Mrs.). See Little Library. 
Crane (Capt C. P.\ See Little GvUmu 
Crashaw (Richard). See Little Library. 
Crawford (F. Q.). S?c Mary C. Danson. 
Croftt CT. R. N.), M.A. See Simplified 

Ftaan Texts. 
CraM JJ. A.^ H.A. XHB FAITH OF 

THBBtBI^ Ftm^%90, 
riMltifcMi (n ) THE LOVIMOBAL- 

LAD OF LORD BATEMAN. Whh 11 

Plates. Cr. \6mo. is. 6d, net. 
CttnUffe (Sir P. H. B.), Fellow of All SoaU' 

College. Oxford. THE HISTORY OF 

THE BOER WAR. With many lUus- 

trations, Plans, and PoftuiUb /u ■ wA* 

Quarto, i^s. each. 
Cranp(B.). See Wagner. 
Cunyarhaiiie(H.XC.B., See 4 

Library. 
Catts(e. L.XD.D. S«eL 
Danlell (G. W.X M.A. 

Religion- 

Danson (Mary C.) and Crawford (F. Q.). 
FATHERS IN THE FAITH. Fti^ 
iv0. It. 6d. 

Onto. LA GOMMBOU Dl UMITE. 

TlMllUHiVnk«aMdkyPiM»rTonmEe, 

M.A.rDn[itt. Cr.9m, tt. 
THE PURGATORIO OF DANTE. 

Translated into Spenserian Pro^e by C. 
GoRtxiN Wkirht. With the Italian text. 
Fcaf. 3r 2J. fid. net. 

See also P.-»get To>nbee, Little Library, 
St.-\ndard Library, and Warren -Vernoo. 
Darley (George). See Little Library. 
D' Arcy (R. F.), M.A. A NEW TRIGOX- 
OMETKY FOR PEGINNERS. With 
nuinc;oi;>» diagrams. Cr. 6r»«. is. bd. 
Davenport (Cyril). See Connoisseur's 

Library and Little P.ixA^ , ;i Art. 
Oavey (Richard). THE PAGEANT OF 
LONDON With 40 Illustrations in 
Colour by John Fullkylovk, R.I. InTwa 
Volumes. Demy Srv. 1 ^j. net. 
Davis (H. W. C), M.A., fellow and Tutor 
of Balliol C\ l lege, Author of * Charlemagne.' 
ENGLAND UNDER THE NORMANS 
AND AN GEVINS : ao66>safa. With Maps 
■iii UlaaiRiiniw jJHijiBafc so* Umt. 



Digitized by Google 



GniBAL LiTBKATUBS 



7 



Alt. 



(Mrs. N.X. 8m littk 



Dmuic (A. C.)< See Little Library. 
Dearmer (Mabel). A CHILD'S LIFE OP 

CHRIST. With 8 lilu-tr.itions in Cn!.,ur 
I>y E. FoKItSCUK-BKlCKUALK. Large Cr. 

Delbos(L«oaK THE METRIC SYSTEM. 

tV. Srv. 3S. 
DenostheocA. AGAINST CONON AND 

CALLICLES. E.iited by F. Dakwih 

Swirr, M.A. Tkird Edition, Fca^. 

ivo. it. 

CHckeil* (ChariM). S«c Little Library, 

LP.L., and Che rt tf te a. 
DlckfaMM^(BMl|r). POEMS. Cr. Im. 

DIcklaaon (O. L.), M.A., FeQcnr af Klns't 
Collefre, Cambridge. TUS GREEK 
VIEW OF UfB. J^MdHkm. €$% 

Brv. 3t. 6d. 
DickAon (H. N.X r'.K■^ret. Soc. 
METEOROLOGY. Ifluinucd. Cr.itn>. 

3S. (ui. 

DUke (Lady), BalkylMlM). aad Whitley 
(Miss). VOMBII'S WOkK. On IM. 

as. 6d. 

Dillon (Edward). ' r nnuif •jUhmj 

and Littlr r.ooks on Art. 
Dttcbfleld (P. H.). M.A., F.S.A. THE 

STORY OF OUR ENGLISH TOWNS. 

IK^th an Introduction by Augustus 

Jassopr.D.D. Stc^Rditicm. Cr.tM U. 
OLD ENGLISH CUSTOMS: ~ 

IkaPMMBtXiM Cr.aM. 
SKdUSHyiLLAGIS. IHaMU 

EdtHm* Cr, Sm. a/. 
THE Old PARISH CLERK. With 30 

Illustrations. Demy^ivo. js.td.ntl. 
Dixon (W. M.X M.A. A PRIMER OF 

TENNYSOiL ^mmdEdiiim, Ovtm 

ENGLISH POETRY FROM BLAKE TO 
BROWNING. Secomi KditioH. Cr. Sxv. 

Doney (May). S ( ) N GS OF THE REAL. 

Cr. 3:-c>. ^1 ()</. net. 
A volume of poems. 

Douffias (James). TRB MAN IN TRK 

PULPIT. Cr. %vo. ii. 6ti. nei. 

Dowden (J.X D.D., I>ord BiNhop of Edin. 
bur^b. See Churchman's I.ii>rary. 

Ora£« (Q.). See Books on Business. 

IMver(S. R.X O.D., D.CL., Canon ofChriibt 
Chncb. Rm^ Profeaaor of Habraw ia the 
XMnSk^jSTOjtSotd. SERMONS ON 
SUBJECTS CONNECTED WITH THE 
OLD TESTAMENT. Cr. Sm. «r. 
See also Westminster Commrnt.irici. 

DryCWakaliosX Sea LitUo Guides. 

OifftiMl(A. R.V SMUmaBodnoiiArt. 

8to Booica oa BasiiMBa. 
YiUMlitort. MY MEMOIRS. 

translated by E. NI. Wali.kr. With Por- 
limits. /» ^ix yoiuAtts, Cr. 6s. tmcA. 



■^(J.TVtD.Sc..MUi ■■ 

GENERAL ELEMENTARY 




With 114 Illustratic 

Cr. Svo. y. 6d. 
Dunstan(A. E.), B.Sc. See Junior 

Ii4K>k> aiul Textbooks of Science. 
Darham (The Ear! of). A REPORT ON 

CANAD.\. With an Introductor>' Note. 

Penty ivo, AS. bd. net, 
Dntt(W. A.). THE NORFOLK BROADS. 

With coloured Illustrations hf FXamc 

SOUTHCATB. Cr. 8fO. 6x. 

WILD LIFE IN EAST ANGLIA. With 
x6 Illiutrations in colour by Fbamx South* 
CATS, R.B.A. Stemd £dtHm. Ihmp 
itw. fs. td. net. 
See also Little Guides. 

Barie(John). Bishop of Salisbury. MICRO- 
COSMOGRAPHIE, or A PIECE OF 
TUB WORLD DISCOVERED. P9U 
i6mmi vitni. 

Cdmonda (Major J. B.)i Sea W. B. Wood. 

Edwards (QeaMnt), M.P. RAILWAY 
NATIONALIZATION. Stctmd tdUim 
Revised. Crvum 8cw. at. 6d. mtL 

Edwarda (W. DMigli^ 80a OoMMNiit 
Series. 

Effan (Pteroe). See LP.L. 
Bfferton (H. E.). M.A, A HISTORY OF 
BRITISH COLONIAL POLICY. New 
and Cheaper Issue. Demy 8f*. 71, 6d. tut. 
A Colonial Edition is also published. 
Ellaby (C. O.). See Little Guides. 
Ellerton (F. 0.). See S. J. Stone. 
Ell wood (Thomas), THE HISTORY OF 
THE LIFE OF. EdtedbyC Ob GMnv^ 
M Cn 8f'tf. 6x. 
Eplct0lM» See Aurelius 
Brasmus. A Book called in Latin EN* 
CHIRIDION MILITIS CHRISTIANI, 
the Maoual of the Cbriadaa 



Fhaa (he edidoa . 
Wocde, 1533. %t'6d.'m»t. 
Palrbrothcr(W. H.\ M.A. THEFHILO- 

SOPHY OF T. H. GREEN. Second 
Edition. Cr. St'O. 3f. (»{. 

Farrer (Refrlnatd). THE GARDEN OF 
ASI.\. Second Edition, Cr. Zva. 6s. 

Pea (Allan). SOME BEAUTIES OF THE 
SEVENTEENTH CENTURY. With 
83 Illustrations. Second Edition. Demy 
Fr o. J IS. iid. net. 

FELISSA; OR, THE LIFE AND 
OPINIONS OF A KiriEN OF SENTI- 
MENT. With 13 Coloured Plates. PtU 
i6ma. ts. (sd. net. 

Perrler (SusanV See Little Ubnm 

FIdler (T. Claxlt^ ILImL CR. 8ae 
Books OB ITmiiKai 

Ploldlll£(Hoarir>. See Standard Library. 

Ftiui(S.W.),llJL - - - 

Plrtii(J.B.X See Little GttUeiL 
Fifth (C H.), M.A. CROMWELL'S 



ARMV: a History of the EnglUh Soldier 
during the Civil Wars, the ComoMOweallbi 
tClPwUClMll CWtM tfft 



8 Mkssk.s. M£xau£M's Catalogus 



ILA. ANWALS OF 



l«hM> (O. W.)i 

SHRBWSBUftT SCWXML lUustrmted. 



FKsO«ral4(Btfwvtf). 

or OMAR khayyAm. 



THE rubAiyAt 

Pniitsd from 
the Fifth and last Edition. With a Com- 
mentary by Mrs. Stsphbn Batson, and a 
Biography of Omar by E, D. Ross. Cr. 
itfi. 6s. Sre aUo Miniaturs Library. 
Fltxaerald(H. P.). A CONXISE HAND- 
BOOK OF CLIMUERS, TWINERS. 
AND WALL SHRUBS. lllwllMi 1 
Fcap. Rrv. jj. f)d, net. 
FJt/patrlck (5. A. O.). See Ancient Cities. 
Flecker (W. H.), M.A., D.C.I-. Headmaster 
of the Dean Clo^e S' hool, Ctichcnham. 
THE STUDENTS PRAYER BOOK. 
The T«xt of Mornino and Evening 
Pravbr and LtTANY. With an Introduc* 
tion and Note*. Cr, %th>. zs. M, 
Rnz(A. W.), M.A., Willi.nm Dow Profe<;v>r 
of Political Kronnmv in M'Liil! Univer-itv, 
Montreal ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES. 
Demy 8tw. ^t. M. tut, 
Porte«c«e(Mrs. Q.). See Little Books on Art. 
PrsMT (David). A MODERN CAM- 
PAIGN : OR, WAR AND WIRBLSSS 
TELBGRAPBT III TBS BAR BAST, 
nivtimttd. CnSw. 6r. 
A Colonial Editioa is also pabKsbed. 
PHmm* (J. P.). ROUND THE WORLD 
ON A WHEEL. With loo Iliastrations. 
Fourth F.diti^H Cr. 8rv. 6*. 
French (W.), M A. See Textbooks of 
Science. 

Preudenrelch (Ed. von). DAIRY BAC- 
TERIOLOC.Y. A .Short Miinual for the 
Use of Students. Translated by J. R> 
AiNSWuRTM Davis, M.A. Stttmd MtKHtn, 
Rrt'ised. Cr. as. 6d. 

Pulford (N. W.X M.A. 9h Ctiii lIiiiiiii'* 

Hible. 

Oallaher fD.)and Stead (D. W.). THE 
COMPLETE RUGBY FOOTBALLER, 
ON THE NEW ZEALAND SYSTEM. 
With an Account of the Tour of the New 
Zealanders in Enj;land. With 3f Iliastra- 
tions. Second Edititn. Demyiva. iot.6d. 
net. 

Oalllchan (W. M.). .See Little G«id«t. 
Qanbado (Qeoffrey, Em.)* See I.P.L. 
OMkell (Mn.). Sm Littte 

Standard Liltfary. 



Ubcary and 



OMqaet, the RMt Rtv. Abbo^ aaS. See 
Anttquaty'a Bmks. 

0 WH (M. B.), M.A. FcUowofNewCoIlegr , 
Odbfd. BATTLES OF ENGLISH Hlb 
TORY. Widi nimwnMis Plans. Ftmrth 
MetiHm. RaviMd, wiA a o«w Chapter 
iocludiqgtlMSeaA ABkaBWIw. Ct%Wg». 
y.tdT^ 

A HISTORICAL r.EOGRAPHV OF THE 
BRITISIi K.MPIRE. .iV.. W EdiHon. 
Cr. 8r#. 7,i- (>d. 
Oibblns (H. de B.), Liit.D., M A IN- 
DUSTRY IN ENGLAND: HISTOKI- 
CALOUTUNES. With s Man. F*mrtA 





IBB UPUSTMIAL HBTORY OF 
^OLAMIX. fMHJMKlM. RariHd. 

ENGLISH SOCIAL RBFORliBR& 
Stcrtul EdIMm. Iw. at. 6d. 
See also OMMMhl 8«MB Md B. A. 

Hadfield. 

aibboo. (Edward V TirF DECLINE AND 
FALL OF THE RO.MAN EMPIRE. 
Eklited with Notes, Appendices, and Maps 
by J. B. BrRV, M.A., Litl.D., Regius Pio- 
fcisor of Gr<?ek at (jambridge. /« Smem 
I V/x w.v J. Pemv Sre. Gilt ta/, is.6d. emck. 
Cr. St,', ts. ea(k 

MEMOIRS OF MY LIFE AND WRIT- 
INGS. Edited by G. »«— — ■ HM4« 
LL.D Cr. Bro. 6*. 
See also Standard Ubraiy. 

QiiilW (B. C D.DL, L«d Bfahop «r 
OlewMMT.SaaWai 
Handbooks tt 
rraphies. 

Oilbert (A. R.). See Little Books on .Art. 
aioag (M. R.) and Wvatt (Kate M.>. A 

BC50K OF ENGLISH GARDENS. 

With a4 Illustrations in Colour. Demy 

8ro. lor. W. net. 
Godfrey (BUzabatk). A BOOK OF RE- 

MEMBRAXCB. B^ad Vf . Aa^lM. 

s.r. f>d. tut. 

Oadley(A D.), M.A.. F?' « of Magdalen 

College, Oxford. LYRA FRIV^OLA. 

Third Ediiton. Fcafi.lvc. zs. dd. 
VERSES TO ORDER. Second Editi^m, 

Feci/'. E- a. IS. 6d. 
SECOND STRINGS. Fem^. 8t>*. a*. 6d. 

Goldamlth (Oliver). THE VICAR OF 

WAKEFIM n /v.iA With to 

Plates in rriotogr.-ivuie by 1 ony Johaimot, 
JLeather, a/. 6d. net. 

.See Also I.P.L. and Standard Library-. 

Qoodrich. Freer (A.X IN A SYRIAN 
S.\DDLE- new y 67V. 7s.6d.1ut. 
A Colonial Edition is also published. 

Qorat (Rt. Hon. Sir JoiinX THE CHIL. 
DREN OF THE NATION. Sttmd 
Edition. Demy 8r<tf. js, 6d. ngL 
Goodfa (H. L.k M.A, Principal of Walk 
TtwologicalCoMia. See Westrainsttf Coni- 
— lanet. 



Onrtui (P. AaSlniiiO XfiB RURAL 

Granffer (P. S.), M.A., LittD. PSYCH- 
OLOGY. Third Edition. Cr. Btv. 3S. bd. 
THE. SOUL OF A CHRISTIAN. O.Bt.*. 6*. 

Uray(E. M'QMMa). GERMAN FAVORS 
FDR UNSlra^TBANBLAIimr CK 



Omr (P. L.\ B.S& THB PRINCIPLES OF 
MAGNETISM AND SLBCTRICITY: 
an Elementary Tezt-Boolc With i8t 

Diagrams. Cr. 8ro. 3J. 6d. 

Green (Q. Buckland), M..A., late Fellow 
of St. John's College. Oxon. NOTES ON 
GREEK AND LATIN SYNTAX. O. 



Digitized by Google 



General Litbratokb 



9 



T.X WLIL 9m 



M.A- A HISTORY 

133-104 B.C. Demy 



tn (B, 
Library. 
Creenidrc (A. H. J 

OF ROME: From 

Qrecnwell (Dora). See ^^iIliatu^e Library. 
Qrerory (R. A.). THK VAULT OF 
HK.VVKN. a Popular Introductioit to 

Astri iruiiiiy. I llitstratcd. CV. 8t'c'. ys. txf. 
Gregory (MUs B. C). See Library of 
Devotion. 

Orubb (H. C). See Textbooks of TechnoI<»y. 
•uiney (LouIm 1.). HURRELL 

FROUDt^ : Memoninda and Commeata. 

Illustrated. DtmrifPfi. ios.6d.M4t. 
awvnn(M. L.). A BIRTHDAY BOOK. 

New and chcapc" IMIM. Rtyalivo. ks.iu/. 

CYPRUS. With Maft aad IIImihiIbbi 

Dtmy 8tw. 15s. luU 

Haddon (A. CA ScD., F.R.S. HEAD- 
HUNTERS BLACK, WHITE. AND 

DROWN, " ill , Tlliliiliiiiw ■ml 1 

Map. Drmy 8w. i«. 

HadfieldCR. A.) and Qlbblns (H. de B.). 
A SHORTER WORKINO DAY. Cr. 

Hall (R. NO «nd Neal (W. (i.). 1 HK 
ANCIENT RUINS OF K il< )DKsIA. 
Illustrated. Second EdttioM, revised. 
Demy 8zw. lor. 6eL Hti. 
Hall (R. N.). GREAT ZIMBABWE. 
With namnroos Plans and Illustrations. 
Stttltd JEdHion. Rpyalivc. 10s. 6d. net. 
HaHlMW(P« J.}, L>-£>' ^ce Byzantine Texts. 
HMMMMd (J. L). CHARLES JAMES 

FOX. lMmvd90, tot,6d. 
' f (D.! A SHORT HISTORY OF 
ROYAL NAVY, ISkmaud, 7W 

Hannay (James O.), M.vV. THE SPIRIT 
AND ORIGIN OF CHRISTIAN 
MOX ASTICISM. O. Srfl. 6s. 

THE WISDOM OF THE DESERT. / Va/. 
811W. \M. 6d. met. 

Hardle (Martin). See Connoiiseur's Library. 

Hare (A. T.), M.A. THE CONSTRUC- 
TION OF LARGE IN DUCI ION COILS. 
With numerous DiaKramv Demy Stw. 6t, 

HlwriMB (Clilford). READING AND 
RJCADERS. /-cu/. Erv .'1. U. 

Harvey (Alfred), M.B. See Ancient Cities. 

HawtllOnie(NathanlelX See Little Library. 

HEALTH, WEALTH AND WISDOM. 
Cr. 8r«. \t. net. 

HeaHiCrr— IrltX See Uttle Guidca. 

H— ttiCPliilMfX SeeCoaaoiaanu^tUlNrwx- 

IMto JfiSK OTOPIBglN SAUTf- 
rat?. tVaadated ftooi dM Ptaad 
V. M. CuAwroao. Sew. yt. id. 

tflMUterson (B. W.). Fdlow of Exeter 
College. Oxford. THE LIFE AND 
PRI NCI PATE OF THK EMPEROR 
NERO. Illustrated. AV:<' and tkmftr 
item. Dtmy fewb 74. td, tut. 

ATIM1XMYAL6. JN^lw^ m,^mtL 



by 



A OOLDSM MAIa 
idVe 

TO AND PONTE: 
G.imcs. lUiulrated. 



lerson (T. P.). 

Oxford Biographies. 
Henley (W. E.). ENGLISH LYRICS. 

Second Edittem. Cr. Bp*, a*. 6</. »•//. 
Henley (W. E.).-ind Whlbley (C.) A BOOK 
OF ENGLLSH PROSE. Cr. 1^. is.td. 
nft. 

Hen80n(H. H.\ BD., Canon of Westminster. 

APOSTOLIC tn K I S I I A N IT V : As Illu*. 

trated by the Epistles of St. Paul to the 

Corinthians Cr. Srv. 6x. 
LIGHT AND LEAVEN : Historical and 

Social Skrmons. Cr. 8sv. 6x. 
Herbert (QeMg^ See Lttraiy of Devotion. 
Harbert of CKWtty (Lmi4>* Sea MM^ 

ture Library. 
Hewlna (W. A. SA RA. ENGLISH 

XRApi AND FlNANCS IN XiUt 

UEVEMTlUtNTB CSNTURY. Cnaaik 

ar.6A 
Hawitt (Btbd M.) 

A Day Book of ~ 

%vp. ar. 6^. net. 
Heywood (W.). PAI 

A Book of Tu.st..iii 

Reyal%vo. sis. net. 
See al&o St. Francis of A&sisi. 
Hllbert(T.). Sec Little Blue Books. 
Hill (Clare). See Textbooks of Technology. 
Hill (Henry), B.A., Headmaster of the Hoy's 

Hish Scho<^, Worceacer, Cape Colony. A 

SOUTH AFRICAN AXfTHIIKna 

Cr. Br*. 3*. 6d. 
Hillegaa (Howard C). WITH THE 

BOER FORCES. With 24 Illustrariona. 

Second Edition. Cr. Btw. ts. 
A Colonial Edition is also published. 
HlndCC Lawla). DAYS IN CORNWALI. 

Wi^ stf lUaiMbm in Colow to WteiAK 

Paaoo«,aBdaorhotographa> Cr. Im. 
A Colonial Edidea b ate pobCii^ 
Hirst (P. W. ) See Books on Business. 
Hoara(J. Douelaa). ARCTIC EXPLORA- 
TION. With tg Illustrations and Maps. 

Dertty Zv(?, ys. kd. net. 
Hobhouae (Bmily). THE BRUNT OF 

THE WAR. W& Map—dlllHlHlllBl 

Cr. 8rv. ts. 
Habhouse(L. T.\ l>llr.w of C.CC, Oxford. 

THE THEOKV OF KNOWLEDGE. 

Demy 8t'<». lor. bfi. net. 
Hobson(J. A.). M.A. INTERNATIONAL 

TRADE: A Study of ] 

Cr. 8t<0, 9X. f)d. net, 
PROBLEMS OF POVEHTT. . 

Cr. %vo. ar. <xL 
THE PROBLEM OF THE UNEM- 
PLOYED. TUrdEmmu C^im, mM 
HadfUii (T.X IXCI. See \mHm af 

HadftaarMrs. W.) ROW TO lOBNTirY 

OLD CHINESE PORCELAIN. Smtmi 

Edition. Past iw. 6s. 
Hots (Thomas Jefferson). SHELLEY 
AT OXFORD. With an Introduction by 
R. A. SraaATifEiLD. Fca/. 8r'<j. is. net. 
Hpldaa-Staiia (0. de). See Books on 



A 2 



lO 



Messrs IIbthiisn's Catalogue 



Holdlch (Sir T. H.), K.C.l.E. THE 
INDIAN BORDERLAND: Heing a 
Personal Record of Twenty \ lllu»- 
Inted. Demv 8t'<». ioj. 641'. uft. 

A Colonial Edition is also published. 

Holdswortta (W. S.). M.A. A HISTORY 
OF ENGLISH LAW. /« Two ro/umts. 
Vfl, I. Demy 8w. lox. 6-/. net. 

Holland (Canon Scott). See Library of 
Devotion. 

Holt (Bmlly). THE SECRET OF POFU- 

LARITir I How u» Addewv SoeU Smmu. 

Cr. 8t»tf. jj. td. rut. _ 
A Colonial Edition is alto published. 
Nalvoalwm. J.). THS CO-OPSRATIVE 

MOVEMENT TO-DAT. fimrAE^ihn. 

Cr. 8«w. M . 
HoM(NatluuilelJ.). SeeAntiatuury'sBookx. 
HoMmar. S«e Little GaUeriM and Little 

Books oa Art. 

HarabofVkCB. L. SAMJL WAISSlOO : 
A Naimivo and Criudsra. Wlft Plans. 
Stcond RiRHtiu Cr. (kv. 5^. 
Srr a! o Oxford Biographiet. 

HortbtA. C). See Textbooks of Technology. 

Horton(K. F.\D.D. See Leaden of Religion. 

Hosle (Alexander). MANCHURIA. With 
llluttraiions and a Map. S§tmd Jt^Ulmt, 
Demy 8w._ js. (><i. net. 
A Colonial Edition is aUo published. 

How (P. D.). SIX GREAT SCHOOL- 
MASTERS. With Portraits and lllustr.n- 
tions. Second Edition. Demy ivo. js. 6d. 

Howell (A. a. Ferrers). FRANCISCAN 
DAYS. Translated and arranged by. Cr. 
Bvo. V. 6d. net. 

H«w«U^.X TRADE UNIONISM— Naw 
Ajrn O&Bb ^Snm«I MdMUni, Or. tew. 

u. 6d, 

Hodson (Robert). MEMORIALS OF A 
WARWICKSHIRE PARISH. Illustrated. 
Demy int. ts' net. 

laa (Sir WUHaoO. K.CB.. O.M.. 
.L..'1ULS. THiROYALSOCIBTY ; 

B W THS StaVS AMD HI THK 
With 15 Ukutratkos. Wide 

Royal iw. ^s. 6d. net. 
Huthca (C. E.). THE PRAISE OF 

SHAKESPEARE. An En^jlish Antho- 
logy. With a Pref-ice by Sidney Lek. 
Demy Srv. 31. tai. net. 
Husrhes (Thomas). lOM BROWNS 
SCHOOLDAYS. With an Introduction 
.Tnd Notes by Vernon Renoall. Leather. 
A'n],it linn'. If. 6./. net. 
Hutchinson (Horace G.) THE NEW 
FOREST. Illustrated in coluvir with 
SO Pictures by WAi.TBa TvNOALB aod 4 
by Lucy KKMP-WatCiL A Ctmttr Mdi- 
tion. Cr. 8i'f. 61. 
Hutton (A. W.), M.A. See Leaders of 

Religbn .ir.d Library of Devotion. 
Hntton fBdward). THE CITIES OF 
UMBRIA. With many lUnsliatioaib 
whidi soare in Colour, bv A. Pna. Stbfnd 



! THK CITIES OF SPAIN. See«m4 EJiHtm. 

With many Illustrations, of which •4 an ta 
Colour, by A. W. RiMiNCTOK. Dn^9n». 
js. 6d. net. 
A Colonial EUIition is also published. 
FLORENCE AND NORTHERN TUS. 
CANY. With Coloured Illustr.uions by 
William Parkinson. 6j. 
A Cnlonial Edttioo is also publislted. 
ENGLISH LOVE POEMS. Edited with 

an Introduction. Feeif. Bvo. 
Hvtton (R. H.X See Leaders of Religion. 
HntlMi^ra[. k^l M.A. TU£ LUTE OF 
Sm raOMAB If OKB. WM 
Cr.fMk 51; 



Hyett (P. A.X A 8B0RT HISTORY OF 
FLORENCE. D4my&oo. 7t.6d.net. 

Ibaaa (Henrik). BRAND. A Drama. 
Traaalatad by Wiujam WiLaolu TAM 

loM <W. R.X M.A. Fdlow and Tatar of 
Hflrtfeid cSlege, Oxfortl. CHRISTIAN 
MYSTICISM. The Bampton Lecttires for 
1899. D'***/ Sw. 121. td. net. See also 

Library of Devotion. 

lnnea(A. D.). M./V. A HISTORY OF THE 
BRITISH IN INDIA. IVM lf^pa mI 
Plans. Cr. Btv. 6t. 

ENGLAND UNDER THE TUDORS. 
WithMasa. Dtmf9of. tofcjM.MSi^ 

Jacksoa (C. B.X ILA. Sm TaMkook* of 

Science. 

Jackson (S.), M. X See Commercial Series. 
Jackaoa (P. HaadlMi. See UttlaOaidKa. 
Jacob (F^X M.A. Saa jv^ BmriMte 

JaMa(W.H.N.X A.R.C&,AMJL Sm 

Textbooks of Tcchnol otf!. 

Jama (J. Stephen). UIUSIIL lOOLS, 
AND CORNERS. Cr. 9m. aa<£ 
See also Books on Bosloees. 

Ja«rey(i(D.Gwyn). DOLLY S THE.\TR1. 
CALS. Described and Illustrated with 14 
Coloured Pictures. SuperRoyal xkmo. 2:.6d. 

Jenka (E.X M.A., Reader of Law in the 
University of Oxford. ENGLISH LOCAL 
GOVERNMENT. Cr. 8rv». 11s. 6d. 

Jenner (Mrs. H.\ See Little Books on Art. 

Jennings (Oscar), M.D., MemV^r of the 
Bibliographical Society. EARLY W< lOP. 
CUT INITIALS, containing over thirteen 
hundred Reproductions of Pictorial Letters 
of the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centtiries. 
Dai^lfi*. *ts. net. 

Jaaaop^(A m — X PJ>» See iiailf ef 

Rehgioik 

Jevons (F. B.), M.A . T iit.D.. Principal of 
Bishop Hatfield s Hail. Durham. RE- 
LIGION IN XVOUmOM. O. tML 

31. 6d, net. 

See lil.MD Churchs 
books of Theology. 

Johnaoa(Mra. Barhaaa). WILLIAM BOD- 
HAM DONNS AND HIS FlUUiOS. 



Digitized by Google 



Gbhbkal Utbbatubb 



II 



JoluMton(Slr H. H.). K.C.B. BRITISH 
CENTRAL AFRICA. With nearly aoo 
Illustrations Six Maps. Third EditifH. 
Cr. iSj. net. 

A Colonial Edition Is also pul lished. 

J«ac« (R. Crompton), M A. POE&IS 
OF THE INNER LIFE. S«l«GtMl 1^. 
ThirtctHthEditim, fcaf.Zva, t.€AmH. 

Jooes M.). See Commercul Series. 

JaOM (H. P.X See Textbooks of Science. 

J«aM(L. A.AtlMrlnrXK.C,M.P. THE 
MINBRS* GUIDE TO THE COAL 
MINES IIBG1II.ATI0NACT& CHIw. 

COMMERCE IN WAR. Rcyal^vo. ^is.net. 

J on MM (Ben). See Standard Library. 

Jallana (Lady) of Norwich. REVKLA. 
TIONS OF DIVINE LOVE. Edited by 
Grace Wakkal K. f >. ferv. td. 

Juvenal. S«-c Cl.l^^lcal 'I ralihUtiotis. 
•Kappa.' LKT YOUTH BUT KNOW: 

A Flea for Reason in Education. Cr. Zvo. 

3T. 6d. net. 

Kaufnuuin (MA SOCIALISM AND 
MOD£RNTIK>UOIIT. StfmutMdmm. 
Cr, Stv. ax. 6d. net. 
KMtflMrij. F. ), D. D. T 1 1 K AGAPE AND 

THE EUCHARIST. t>. 8w. 3*. td. 
Itetorjohli). THE POEMS OF. Edited 
vbh Introduction and Note* by £. fU Selin- 
M.A. Dtmyivo. ft.6d,mi, 
IS OF GOLD. Bilittln htm the 
FoclcteC jji^tM, vi^mA 
See abt UHfa lAnuy md Smdud 
librarr. 

Keble(Joha). THE CHRISTIAN YEAR. 

Withan Ii)tro<luctic II jiiid .Votes by W. Lock, 
T).lt., XWirJcnorKtblc C" ^Ilc^te. Illu.<.iraled 
by K. A.NMr.u Hkll. rinnt Edition, /iM/. 
8t'i'. 31. f^i/. ; ftiddfii morocco^ 51; 
See also Library of Devotion. 

Kelynack (T. N.X M.D., M.R.C.P., Hon. 
Secretary of the Society for tli« .Study of 
Inebriety. THE DRINK PROBLEM 
IN ITS MEDICO -SOCIOLOGICAL 
ASPECT. Edited by. With • Dii«paUBB. 
Demy Brw. ^s. dd. net. 

Ken^fs (TbomaaA). THE IMITATION 
OF CHRIST. With an laUoducOon by 
DeanFarsar. lUostratedbjrCliaGBKB. 



Abo TkMBdaMi Vf C. Bigg, D.D. Cr. 
V. 6d, Stt ano Library of Devotion 

and Standard Library. 

Kennedy (Bart-). THE CREEN 
SPHINX. Cr. 8iv. y. 6d. nfi. 
A Colonial Edition is also puMishc'l. 

Kennedy (James Houghton), D.D., Assist, 
ant lecturer in Diviiutyin the University of 

. Dublin. ST. PAUL'S SECOND AND 
THIRD EPISTLES TO THE CORIN- 
THIANS. WithIntroductiM|,IMMMiaai 
and Notes. Cr. ^vt>. 61. 

Kimmlne(C. W.X M.A. THE CHEMIS- 
TRY OF LIFE AND HEALTH. lUns. 
trated. Cr, Zvo. ax. 

KtagtalwCA. W.> SeeLktieLibocr* 



KIplinff (Rudyard). BARRACX^ROOM 
BALLAD:^. Tkmtsamd^ 
tecond EditicH. Cr. Bi'tf. 6j. 
\ Coloniiil Edition is alv5 published. 
TH E SEVEN SEAS. 63i«tf7ViMWjW. TtnA 
Edition, Cr. in*. 6c 
A Colonial Edition u also piibliehed. 
THE FIVE NATIONS. ^ Tktmmmi, 
Second Edition. Cr. 8vo. 61. 

A Colonial Edition is alsojpublibbed. 
DEPARTMENTAL DITTIES. Suetmmtk 
RUHmt, Cr.iw. 6s. 
A Colonial Edition i » j jM» J W l b U ^ „ 
Kalght (Albert B.> TStOOSOUnE 
CRICKETER. Ilhtfted. Ifmm <Nk 

7/. 6d. ntt. 
A Colonial Edition is alao psblished. 
Kai^t(H. J. C), M.A. See Chorchman'>, 
Bible. 

Knowlinf (R. J.), M.A., Professor of New 
Te-st.unciit Kxegesis at King's College, 
Londun. Sec Westminster Couiinentaries, 

Lamb ^Charles and Mary)t THE WORKS 
OF. Edited by E. V. Lucas. Illustrated. 
In Satn Volumes. Demy 8iv>. 71. (yd. each. 
See also Little Librar)- and E. V. Lucas. 

Lambert (P. A. H.). See Little Guides. 

Lambroa (Profeaaor). See Ry/antine Texts. 

Lane- Poole fSUnley). A HISTORY OF 
EGYPT IN THE MIDDLE AGES. Fully 
Illottrated. Cr. 8cw. 6f. 



Law (William). See labcwj «C DmdM 

and Standard Library. 
Leach (Henry). THE DUKE OF DEVON- 

SHIRE. A Biography. With la lUustra- 

tions. Demy %vo. 13J. 6dl IMA 
See also James Braid. 
Le Braz (Anatole). THE LAND OF 

PARDONS. Translated by FkANcas M. 

GosTtiNC. Illustrated in colour. .SffMMf 

Edition. Demy Bfo. js. fni. net. 
Lee (Captain L. Melville). A HISTORY 

OF POLICE IN ENGLAND. Cr. 8w. 

xs. 6d. net. 

LeUi!i(Pefclval). THECOMIC ENGLISH 
GRAMMAR. Embellished with upwards 
of so dtaracterislic lUustrations by John 
Lbbch. J'ost 16MW. ef. 6eL mtt, 

Lm«(V.B.XMJL AiR AND WATER. 
Illuetrated. Cr. 8ml 

Lewis (Mrs. Owyn). A CONCISE 
HANDBOOK OP (JaRDEN SHRUBS. 

Illustrated. Fcap.%vo. "^.fxL net. 

Lisle (Fortiin^de). See Little Book son Art. 

Littlehale8(M.). See Antiquary's Books. 

Lode (Walter), D.D., Warden of Keble 
College. ST. PAUL, THE MASTER- 
BUILDER. Second Edition, Cr. 8vo. 
xs. 6d, 

THE BIBLE AND CHRISTIAN LIFE. 
Cr. ivo. 6s. 

See also Leaders of Religion and Libnry 
of De>-otion. 

(P.X See Little LUmcy 



IS 



MBSSM. liRHOBNlB CATALOGDB 



L0df« (Sir Oliver), F.R.S. THE SUB- 
STANCE or FAITH ALLIED WITH 
SCIENCE: A CatecWsm for Parents 
and Teachers. Cr. Sva. *r. met. 

Loftlio«M(W. P.X M.A. KTUICS AND 
ATONEMENT. Whk ft F^Hliiiiu . 
Demy Btft. 5/. mti. 

Lonjrfellow (H. W.). See Little Librarr. 

LoriOMr (0«or*e HwmA LKTTKRS 
FROM A seLF-MAW ICSKCSAMT 
TOIII880II. Ji^mMMdUlm, Cf,%m 
3«. Ml 

A Cohmtftl Edition is also published. 
OLD GORGON GRAHAM. Second Editimt. 
Cr. 8w. 6i. 

A CoIoni.-iI Edition it also puMishcd. 

I.ovcr (Samuel^. Set I. I' 1,. 

E. V. U iiiid C. L. a. KN<;i AND DAY BY 
DAY : Or, The Enslisliiii.in s Handbook to 
Efficiency. Illustrated by ( muKoK Mokrow. 
tanrth Edition, Eca/>. 4/0. \s. net. 

Lucas (e. v.). THE LI KK OF CHARLES 
l.AMI;. With 35 lilii>tr.ith>ns. Third 
Eiiitii^n. / V/z/v fs.6J.Hel. 
A Colmiia! l-.ditiim is also published. 

A WANDEKKR IN HOLLAND. With 
many Illtistrations, of which 30 are in Colour 
bvHKRBKRT Marshal!.. Sn tntk Edition, 
Cr. i^^o. 61. 

A Colonial Editinn \% also published. 

A WANDERER IN LONDON. With 16 
Illustrations ia Colour by Nbuom Dawson, 
and 36 other IlhttMdou. Fntv^ BdtHtn. 
Cr. toe. 61. 
A Colonial Rdidon ia alio pabltahed. 

riRBSIDB AND SUNSHUII. TUnI 
BdMm. Fc^ Bm. sr. 

THE OPEN ROAD : a Uttle Book for Way 
farerc. Ttntk Eetitimt. Fca^ ivo. sr.; 
India Pa^tr, ft. 6d. 

THE FRIENDLY TOWN : a LitUe Book 
for the Urbane. TAtrd Editim» 
St'tf. 5*. ; / Hii:a Pafrf, jt. 6d. 

Loclan. .See CLissical Translations. 

Lyde(L. W.), M.A. See Commercial Series. 

Lydon(Noci S.). See Innior Sclio.3l Books . 

Lytteiton(Hon. Mra. A.). WO.MEN AND 
THEIR WORK. Cr. 8r<». a/. M. 

Macaulay (Lord). CRITICAL AND HIS- 
TORICAL ESSAY.S. Edited by F. C. Mon- 
tagus, M.A. Tkrtt y»/mimt». Cr. 8m. iSt. 

The only •dkiM of tUi bMk Blflelely 
annoUtod. 

M'AIiMtf. B. B.X lf.A. 8m GtaMMRial 

MmcSm (J. A.X 8m OmicliiMii s 

Library. 

MacCann (Hotmmm AJ. MARY 
STUART. With orer «b llbu l UMkMm, in- 
dadiof a Fh»tiapiec« fa PhMOgliiWiii. 
Tmmimmd Chtm^ Bdhtm. CrAmt te. 
8m sIm Leaders of Rd^ioa. 

McDennott (B. R.), See Books on Easiness. 
M'DowaU(A. S.X Sm Ox&nl BiographiM. 
M Mln g (A. ML). SMChMhMliLftmf 
Macklln (Herbflfft W«X UUL Sm M- 

(|uary's Books. 



Mackenzie (W. LealleX M.A., M.D.. 
D.P.H., etc. THE HEALTH OF THE 
SCHOOL CHILD. 8w». %i. bd. 
Mdlle Mori (Author of). ST. CATHER- 
INE OF SIENA AND HER TIMES. 
WithaS lUustratiotxs. Demy^t^. t s hd.net. 
Manaa (LanrieX M. A A PK 1 M F R 0 K 

WORDSWORTH. Cr. Stv. 9/ tJ. 
MallBjlr Ci. PALitt.D. A HISTORY OF 
TWr TOWT OF TH« 
Miy n iMU Med. Cr.l 



d(P.W.lL LL.D..DDII«lMlNBflMII 
Laws oTEiMlaDdiiitbaUnbcfsityer 
idge. CANON LAW IN ENG- 



RE- 




■iMMNMMda 

tUMtLibnnr. 
I LIFE IN NXL* 



of the 

Cambridge. 

LAND. Royal%v0. js.6d. 
Maiden (H. M A. ENGUSH 

('(IKDS. A Con^p.-inion to tba 
Kni;land. Cr. Sti-". vf. f>d. 
THK, KNGT.ISH CITIZEN: HISRIGHTS 
AND DUTIES. Sixth Editiom. Cr.tm. 

IS. t,.y. 

See also School Histories. 

Marchant (E. C), M.A., Fellow of Peter- 
house, Cambrid;:e. A GREEK ANTUO> 
LOGY Sec<md Editimt, OllM 
See also A. M. Cook. 

Marr (J. E. ), F. R.S. , Fellow of .St John's Col- 
l<«e. Cambridge. THE SCIENTIFIC 
STUDY OF SCENERY. 
lUustnited. Cr. fisw 

AG R ICULTURAL OBCMXMT^ 

Cr. Brvt. dr. 
Marriott (J. A. R.). FALICLAND AND 

HIS TIMES. With M IlbrtntieM. 

Dtmf 8m. is. 6d. tut, 
A Cokmial Edition isalM j 
MwrilCAairaw). Sm^ 
Mm ■«■» (MU^ SEA 

SON'S TIMC. IlhHtnUMl. Cr. 1 

Olf" THe'sPANISH main. With 

Illustrations 
los. tui. net. 
A Ci)loni.il Edition is also pablUherl. 
A SAILOR'S GARLAND. Edited and 
Selected by. Stttmd MdUttm* CH iHw 
3*. 6d. net. 

Maskcll ( A. 1. See Connoisseur's Library. 
Mason (A. J.). D.D. See I,e.i.JerNof Rdicion. 
Ma8see(0eorfrei. I HK I A OI I TION OK 
PLANT LI FK : Lower Fornis. Illustrated. 

Cr. Ivc 3jr. fiy. 

Mastertnan (C. P. Q.X M.A.. M.P. 
TENNV.'^ON AS A RBUGIODS 
TEACHER. Cr. 8m. 6». 
Matheson (Mrs. B. p.X COUNSELS OP 

LIFE. Fea*.%m. «a.&<.M«. 
JVUy (PhllX^HB PHIL ICAT ALBUM. 

Second EdiHam. a/a. M. mgL 
Mellows (Bauia 8.x A SHORT STORY 
OF BNGU8B XITBRATURX. CH 
3*.6A' 

BB (A. M. 8.x THE TRAGEDY 
OF SOUTH AFRICA. Cr. »m. «r. mtt. 
AU0 Cr. 8m. W. net. 
A revised and eniaiged^ edition of the 

nvith 'r's 
^Vfrica.' 



Digitized by Google 



GnnntAL LimATDitB 



«3 



§^ - ■ ..^.^^^ - Wfc ■ 4 JwMiM 

ly IMiMirtfaw, of wUdjasr* b 



K4GLAND'S RUIN : Discussed in Six- 
■nam Ljrrnnw to the Right Hon. 
T''>8«riiCHAM»B»i,Ai»i, M.P. Sivtntk Kdi- 
/ ><». Cr. 8»<». 3//. mt. 

Miles (Eustace), M A. LIFE AFTER 
LIFE, OR. THE THEORY OF REIN- 
CARNATION. Cr. 8w». 9t.td.ntt. 

MOlida (J. a.). THE LIFE AND LET- 
TBRS or SIR JOHN BVJUI&TT 

MILLAIS,^ " * ^ 

With many 
Photogravunb 
7*. dd. net. 

A Colonial Edition \% a)»o pablmed. 

Mnilil(0. P.). I'ICTORIAL GARDEN- 
I NO. Illustrated. Cr. 8tw. _3#. U. tut. 

MiWit (C. T.X ll.I.lf.Bi Sat iMoska of 

rechriolojty. 

Milne (J. a.\ M.A. A HISTORY OF 

ROMAN K.C.VI'T. Fully lUustratrd. 

Cr. 8fo. (>s. 
Milton (Joha). A DAY BOOK OF. 

Edited by R» F. T o W d lWT . 

3/. 6f/. 

See aUo Little Li>>rary, Standard Library, 
MInchln(H. C.I.M A. Sec R. Peel. 
Mitchell (P. Chalmers). M.A. OUTLINES 
OFinOLOGV. Illustrated. Second Edi- 

Hon. Cr. e: <7. 6#. 

Mittoa (O. E.i JANE AUSTEN AND 
HBR TIMES. With many Portraits .md 
lllimiatiuiii Stc*mJ4utdCh*m.^r Edition. 

A ColonLii Edition b alw MblklMd. 
MtMMOVIary M.> QUBBNLOUISA OF 
PRUSSIA. Wtth so lIlMliiaiMi mrd 

•MoOfA.).' Sm Books MBaAMM. 
MoIr(D. M.X See Lhtk Library. 
Mollnos (Dr. MtafeMltf^b 8m UWwyof 

Devotion. 

Money (U O. Chlozza), M.P. RICTIKS 
AND POVERTY. Third Edition. iMmy 
£r'c. 5*. ntt. 

Montsfcu (Henry), Earl of Manchcftter. See 

Library of Devotion. 
MonUlirne. A DAY BOOK OF. Edited 
by C. F. Pond. F<.af. Zvo. 3/. tsd. met. 

MMr*(H. e.> BACK TO THK IMHIK 
Ao uquinr tnto Rami Diyoptthtloa. Cr, 
Sm. sx. id. 

MootMrmcxCJ. 8.0.4^ BJL.LL.B. 
THOMAS A UOfPIS. HIS AGE AND 
BOOK. With ss Illtutrationi. Sicand 

Edition. Demy 8f<». 71. (yd. net. 
Moorhouse (E. Hallam). NELSON'S 

LADY HAMILTON. With 51 Portraits 

Sacand Edition. Demy Zvo. js. td. net. 
AColoi iMlition in also published. 
MoraajfCIarenceO.). See Bookson Business. 
Mero (Sir Thomas). .See Standard Library. 
Morflll (W. R.), Oriel College, Oxford. A 

HISTORY OF RUSSIA FROM PETER 

THK ORKAT TO ALBXAMDKR 11. 

WUTlUpiMdFlMM Cm.%m, |»M 
Blorldi (R. JA late of CTifton OrI^ Sm 

School ^^''"^i iMit vm Series, 



Morria(J.). THK MAKBRS OF JAPAN. 
WithaafilamfaM. Dm u^ smM 



net. 

A Colonial Edition is also pub 
Mama(J.B.X Saa LUUo GoidM. 
MartaaCMIa*,' 

rick. 

Motile(H. C. a.). D.D., Lord Bishop afDww 

ham. See Leaders of Kelicioa. 
Mrtr (M. M. PMtto^TlLA. TBB 
CBllflSTRT OTmi. naMBd. 
Cr, taak at. 
Mmidalfaify.A.), ICA SeeJ. T.Dunn. 
Maaro (R.X LL.D. See Antiquary's Books. 
Naval Officer (AX Sec I. P. L. 
Neal (W. 0.). See R. N. UaU. 
Nawman (ErnestX HUGO WOLT. 

Demy Er-ii. 6i. 
Newnian(Georgc),M.D.,D.P.H.,F.RS.E.. 
Lecturer on Public Health at St. Uarihulo- 
mew's Hospital, and Medical Officer of 
Health of the Metropolitan Borough of 
Finsbury. INFANT MORTALI'A', A 
Social Problem. With 16 Diagrams. 
Demy Ivc 7s. 6if. net. 

- ri.) 



Newman (J. H.) aod othera. Sec Library 

•rf Devotion. 
Nichols (J. B. B.). See Little Library. 
Niciilin (T.). M.A. EXAMINATION 

PAPERS IN THUCYDIDES. Cr. Bvo. as. 
Nimrod. See I. P. L. 
Nornto (Qrya La gsXTHS LIFE OF 

SLR WALTER SCOTT. DkuHmiBd. 

Demy !•«. fs. 6d. utt, 
Nort^BMTd fe. W.X TBB GRBAT 

SIEGB: ThofantataMataad fkO oTPbrt 

Ardiur. inostrMad, D mg^ ior.&£M/. 
Warway(A.H.ju KAnjE& WithasCol- 

oarM luaitntiooi by MAtntfCB Grbikfen- 

HAXSmm, Second Edition, Cr. 8fr. &r. 

Navalia. Thk discipj^ks ATSAIS AND 
OTHER I- KAOMENTS. £ditedbyMi« 
Una Birch. I tap. Br-o, xt. 6d. 

Oldfield (W. J.). M.A., Prebendary of 
Lincoln. A PRIMER OF RELIGION. 
Based on the Catechism or the Caoica 
OP Englani). /^m/w Sew. as. td, 

Oldham (P. a.x KA. Sac Twlbooli af 
SdcDce. 

Oaitail<Mn4> SaaLMdmorRaBgiaB. 

OaMa(& W.C.X M.A.. Fellnw of mi .Souls', 
Oxford. *A HISTORY OF THE ART 
, OF WAR. The Middle Ages, from the 
Fourth to the Foiutecnth Century. Illus- 

tr.itr''!. /'('.",; t;v. luj. (xr. nrS. 
Ottlfy(k. L. t. D.D. Se.; HandWks of 

. ' . 1 I irrs of Religion. 
Overton iJ. II.). ^r.•e Lr.nil<rt<.of Rcllpion. 
0>A en (l^ouplns). St Books ..n Hu^iru vs. 
Oxford(M. N.).ofr,uy'sHos|>iiaL AHAND. 

BOOK OF NURSUia^ 

Cr. Slip. 3X. td. 

Paltes (W. C. CX THE SCIENCE OF 
HYGIENE. Illustrated. Dem^ivo. ij/. 

PalaierfPrederickX WITH KUROKI IN 
MANCHURIA. Illustr.nted. Tkk^ 
EdiHpm. J>em9 Saa> 7« 6d. net. 



Digitized by Google 



Messrs. Hstbukn's Catalogue 



Parker (OniMrt). A IMDCS UABT. 

Parkes (A. K.). SMALL LESSONS ON 
GREAT TRUTHS, /at/. Sew. i/. 6<i 

Parkinson (John). PARADISI IN SOLE 
PARADISUS TERRESTRIS. Q» A 
GARDFN OF ALL SORTS OF fliA» 
SANT FLOWERS. /-W**. £3, -u. mt. 

ParMMrtM-y^ha). HELIO TROPES, OR 
MEW PGSIKS FOR SUNDIAL& tte 
Edited hf Paacma. LMONNt. 0aaf^ 

3r. Sd. tut. 

Parmentier (Pral. Vmi^ See Byaatmc 

Texts. 

Par<son<i (Mr«. CleaiantX GARRICR 

AND HIS CIRCLE. With 36 lilu^tra- 
tralions. Second Edition. Demy 8r<7. 
isx. ftd. net. 
A Colonial Edition is also published. 

PaacaL Sec Library of D«votion. 

Paiton (Qeor^e). SOCIAL CARICA- 
TURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH 
CENTURY. With over joo Illustrations. 
iwtperialQuarto. £,2, i . j. 6</. nrt. 
Seealso l/tttle Book son Art and I.P.L. 

LADY MARY WORTLEY MONTAGU. 
With 84 Portrutt and lilottrations. 
Duty 8e«. isx. nti, _ 
A Colonial Edition \* also published. 

Patcr»oii(W. R.)(Benjamin Swift). LIFE'S 
QUESTIONINGS. Cr. 8rv. v. m/. 

PatterMn (A. HA NOTES OF AN EAST 
COAST NATURALISi: JUIiMtraied la 
ColoartgrV. Sovnnam StumiMiMm. 

NATtTRB %H SASTBUf HORfOLK. 

A series of observatSooB on the Krds, 
Fishes, M.-immaU, Reptiles, and Stalk- 

cycd Cnist.»( cms found ia that neigh- 
bourhood, with .1 list of the species. With 
la Illustrations in colour, by Fkask 
SoUTHGATK. Second KdittL^n. Cr.%v!>. ti. 
Peacock (N.). See Little Books on Art, 
Peake (C. JVL K.\ F.R.H.S. A HAND- 
BOOK OF ANNUALS AND BIEN- 
NIALS. With 34 Illustrations, Fcap. %vo. 
- '.. f !. f-el. 

Pearce (E. WX M.A. ANNALS OF 
CHRIST'S HOSPITAL. IIIHWli 1. 

Pemy %vo. 71. dd. 
Peel (Robert), .md MInchtn (H. C.\ M.A. 

OXFORD. With 100 Illtistrations in 

Col..-,ir. Cr. 8tv. 6». 
Pael fSMa^X Ute Fellow Trinity College. 

0»o(d, and Secretary to the Ro^•al Com- 

Sditum. Cr.tm, t$,td. _ 
PMara (J. P.X 9m Ctodaaa's 

Library. 

P«trie(W. M.PIindersXD.CL.,LL.I>.,Fto' 

fessorof F.g\-ptology at Univemty Colleje. 
A HISTORY OF EGYPT, r«OM THE 
Eari ik-^t Timfs to TJtE Pres«nt Day. 
Fully liiustiatcd. In six volumet. Cr. 
« 8bw. . 6^. each. 
Vol. I. PaaHisTORic Timbs to XVIth 



"Vox- II. The XVI Ith and 

Dtnastibs. Fmmrtk Edition. 
Vol. III. XIXtm to XXXth DYNASTtca. 
You IV, Thb Ecypt or the Ptolxmibs. 

J. P. MAHArnr, Liit.D. 
Vo>L. V. Roman BcTrr. J. G. Milmb, ILA 
Vol. VI. Egypt in the MtoMS Agm. 

Stanlbv Lanr-Poolb, jMJL 
RELIGION AND CONSQENCE IN 

AiraBMT KGYVX. IMebiiim!. Cr. 

SYRIA Sid egvpt, from the tell 

EL AM ARN A TABLETS. Cr.Saa. *i.td. 

EGYPTIAN TALES. Illustrated by Tais- 
TBAM Ellis. In Tvfo Volumes. Cr. 8s«. 
IS. 6d. eack. 
rOVPTIAN DECORATIVE ART. With 

\^r, lilustr-itionv Cr. SriJ. y. 6./. 
PhllUpa(W, A.). See Oxford Hiographies. 
Phillpotta (Eden). MY DEVON vHEAk. 
With 3S Illustrations b3r_J. Lky Pkthy- 
BKIDGE. Seccfi.i and 
Larre Cr. Stv. ft. 
UP ALONG AM) DOWN ALONG. 
IlUutrated by Claude 
Cr. 4/«. 5*. n«t. 
A volume of poems. 
Plarr (Victor a.). SeeSchoall 
Plato. See Standard Libfary. 
Plautaa. THE CAPTIVL Edited, with 
aa Intfodtictioa, Textual Notes, and aCoai. 
■mtVTt ^ LtKDfvAV, Falov of 

,Oalbrd. Dtmyimo. xot,6^meL 
(J. TA aiL. King's 



tioo L _ 

Podmore (PrankX MODERN SPIRI- 
TUALISM. Tw r^tmmus. J>emof ^ 

ax*, ifi. 
A History .Tnd a Criticiim. 
Poer (J. Patrick Lc). A IIODBRN 

LEGIONARY. Cr. &ro. 6j, 
Pollard (Alice). See Little Books on Art. 
Pollard ( A. W.). OLD PICTURE BOOKS. 

Illustrated. Demyir>o. js. td. vet. 
Pollard (Eliza P.). See Little Books 00 Art. 
Pollock (DMrHQ^ ILLVA. Sm Maw 

Business. 

PMterfM. C), M.A., F.L.S. A TEXT- 
BOOK OF AGRICULTURAL BOTANY. 
Illustrated. Smmd JUUIm. Cn Im. 

AS. 6d. 

Power (J. O'Coimor). THE MAKIMO 
OF AN ORATOR. Cr. Btv. 61. 

Prance (O.). Sec R. Wyon. 

PMwcoti (O. UJL ABOUT MUSIC, AND 
WHAT IT U ItADB OF. Ck Sm. 

Piloi(L.L.'X M.AMFeBovoTOlM CbOm^ 
OjssftA HmpRT OF ENGU?H 
fOUnCALBOONOllT. F^rtk £di. 
Cr. 8Mt. ai. &£ 

(Debondi). A MODERN 
BCEOTIA. Cr. Bro. 6s. 
Protheroe (Ernest). THE DOMINION 
OF M.\N. Gbooraphy in its Homan 
AsFBCT. Witii 32 faU>paga lUastiatiaae. 
Cy.lM. aa 



Digitized by Google 



GEMBRAL LIT£RATURB 



oos 



and RowlandMMi. THE MICRO* 
M OF LONDON, or London in 
MbttATOSX. With 104 Illustmioos in 
eokwc Im Thns FahimM. Smimii 410. 



COLD 



CA. T. 

.DEN 
Engush Lnucfc 
as. tti. net. 
QiMvedo VlHeMc. 



P. ▲ 



Se« 



MidatM IJbnrT. 
O.R. and E.S.tHE WOODHOtJSB COR- 
RESPONDENCE. Cr. 8r ,% 6s. 
A Colonial Edition is also published. 
RlKkham (R. BwJb M«A. hm Wmtmtmm 
Commentaries. 

Ran (Laara M.). THE WOMEN-ART 
ISTS OF BOLOGNA. With ao Illus- 
trations. Dtmy 8vo. ^s. 6d, met. 

Ran (Lonsdato). B.D., Oxon. DANTE 
AHD HIS ITALY. WiUi 3s Illustn. 
tiont largely from contantporary Praacocs 
and Docamenta. Demy Bcw. iti. id. tuL 

Rahtx (P. J.i M.A., B.Sc, Lecturer in 
BmUsIi at ■wcilMit VeoturafB' Tadmkal 
Coll«a, BrfaML HIOHUt XMOUSH. 
Cr. twb ifw 

Randolpli (t. W«X M, 9m Tfciy of 
Devotion. 

teale(D. W.). M A. A <^TUDENTS 
HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. Cr. 8tv. 

RaahdaU (Haatlnjra). M.A., Fellow and 
Tutor of New College, Oxford. DOC- 
TRINE AND DEVELOPMENT. Cr, 
•tw. 6j. 

RavcD (J. JA D.D. See Antlquar)''s Booies. 
Rawstome (Lawrence, esq.). Seel.P.L 
Rayaiiaiid (WalterX See School Histories. 
AftMlMdlp. SaaLP.U 
RaaaM(WA HA. XJNIVBRSITY AND 

SOCIAL ^ETTLBMBNTS. Cr. H*. 

*s. td. 

Redpath (H. A.). M.A. Sec Wtitiniimer 

Coninirnturics. 

Reynolds See little Gallariet. 
Rhoadad (t* 

RImSm(W.B.X SMSohad 

Rieu (H.X 
Texts. 

Rabarta (M. B.X See C. C. Channer. 

Ro b e rtl f Uu \ D. D.. Lord Bishop of 
EMMr. KSONVM DBI. The Bampton 

Lectures of r9or. Demy ivo. js. M. net. 
Robertaon (C. Grant). M.A. Fellow of All 
Souls' Co lore, Oxlurd, Examiner in the 
Honours Schctol of Mtxlern History, Oxford, 
r9oi.ioo4. SELECT STATUTES, CASES, 
AND CONSTITUTIONAL DOCU- 
MENtS, idfio-iSja. D$ m9% m, 
tut. 

Robertaon (C. Oraat) and Bartbotomew 

fj. a.X F.R.S.B.. F.itaS. A HIS- 
TORICAL AND MODERN ATLAS OP 



4a.fdlMA 



Robertaon(8fa'0.8.XiLCS.I. CHITRAL: 
Ths Stobv or a Mimor Sibgs. Tkird 
EdiHtm* iDustrated. Cr.lva. a4.6d.m4t. 
(A. W.X M.A. See Cbovchmao a 

(CacOi^ THE MINISTRY 



OPDEAC 

tioo by tba late AacbMifcBt of ( 

Cr, Saw. %t. 6d. 

Robinson (F. S.). SeeConnoisMO^LDvary. 

Rochefoucauld (La). See Little Library. 

Rodwell (Q.), H A. NEW TESTAMENT 
GKEEIC. A Course for Deginners. With 
a Preface by Walt«r Lock, D.D., Warden 
of Keble College. Fca^. 8vo. v. 6</. 

Ro«(Fred). OLD OAK FURNITURE. With 
many Illustrations by the Author, utdudiog 
afrooCkpimlBOolean JtoySm aa»4/ 

RMrera (A. a L.X M^ 8m Baihk 00 

Business. 

Roaa (Edward). THB ROSE READER. 
Illustrated. C>. ta». aHi 6C AJm im 4 
Parts. Pmrtt I. mmd It, &L ta$ks fmrt 
III. W.; PmrtrV. tod, 

RowBtree (Joabna). THB tMPBRXAL 
DRUG TRADE. A Ra-STATBMBirr or 
TMB Opium Quaanow. Stemtd mmd 
Cheeiptr Kdition. Cr. Stw. af. mtt. 

Ruble (A. E.), D.D. See Junior School 
Books. 

Roaeell (W. CUrk). THE LIFE OF 
ADMIRAL LORD COLLING WOOD. 
With Illustrations by F. Bka.kcwvn. 
Fourth Eiiittt^n. Cr. Srv^. fij. 

Sainabory (Herrlnjrton), M.D^ F.R.C.P. 
PRINCIPIATH BR.APBUT1CA. 

Demy Zve. jt. 6ii. tut. 
St. Anaiem. See Library of Devotion. 
St. Aucuatiaa. SeeUbmy oTDevoiionk 
St. Cyraa ^ - " - - - — 

graph tes. 

St. Pranda of Aaalai. THE UTTLE 
PLOWBRS OP THB OLOBIQQI 
8T: PBANCn AMD 



fUABSk Mawhrtraaalated by WttUAM 
Rbtwoodw With HI latradocifaa by A. 

G. F. Howcix, and 40 lllustratieiu Boai 
Italian Painters. Dtmy s«. tut. 
See also Standaid T 
Devotion. 
*SaicI' (H. Manro). REGINALD. 

Edition. FceiS. 8eo. %s. td, tut. 
Sales (St. Fraa ' 

Devotion. 

Salmon (A. L.). See Little Guides. 
Sargeaunt (J.). M.A. ANNALS 

WESTMINSTER SCHOOI* 

Demy tvo. jt. 6d. 
Sathas (C). See Bysantine Texts. 
Schmltt (John). See Byzantine Texts. 
Scott (A. M.). WINSTON SPENCER 

CHURCHILL. With Pertraiu and lUua. 

timtiaaa. Cr. 8t*0. w. 6d, 
ScndanMrafCyrin, Swl 
Salle (V. P.i UX — 

OP DAILY LIPB IMiHiWi, CKl 

M.6d, 



8aa Ubamf af 



OP 



i6 Mbssrs. Methuen's Catalogue 



Mous (Edmund). TOMMY SMITH S 

ANIMALS. Illustr.acd by G. W. Om>. 

Srt'enth FJitlcn. leaf. 8ML MkAC 
School Edition, \s. td. 
TOMMY SMITH S OTHER ANIMALS. 

With la Illustrations by Augusta Guest. 

Stc»nd Kdition. Fcaf>. ^-c. ■21. dd. 
SeUle (J. H.). ANECDOTES OF 

S9LDI£RS. C r. &p» . yi.^mL 

THB*f6uR ^UoS^i6«3 ; >63«: 1664 

FoBos 3 and 4 are ready. 
Folio 9 is BMrhr rwdy. 
s«<- also AmUb wid \JaaSm 

Shakespeare. 
Sharp (A.). VICTOBIAM H»I& CV. 

8r /». 9x. 6</. 
Sharp (Cecil). See S. Baring- Gould. 
Sharp (Mr«. E. A.). See Little Books on 

Art. 

Shedlock (J. S.) THE PIANOFORTE 

SONATA. Cr. 8rv. vf. 
Shellev (Percy B. ). AbON AI S ; an Elegy 

on the deatB of John Keats, Author of 

'BDdyaikiOf'etc. Piia. rtsm tfat lypM of 

Didaiiilas. •a.MA 

(H. KUL Am 8. 



SlMrwelKArthnr), M.A. LIFE IN WEST 
LONDON. Third Edition. Cr. %vo. 
%$. fid. 

Shiplev (Mary E.). AN ENGLISH 
CHURCH HISTORY FOR CHILD. 
REN. With a Pre^ W t|i« B^p of 
Gibraltar. WKh Ifapi and lOaaiiatioiis. 

Part I. Cr. 8w. «. &/. ntt. 

SIchel (Walter). DISRAELI : A Study 

in Personality and Ideas. WMl 

Demy Zx>e. i sj. 6<i ntt. 
See also Oxfuid Biographies 
Slllie(J.). See Little Books on Art. 
Siiaonaon (0. A.). FRANCESCO 

GUARD I. With 41 Plates. Im^iml 

4/#. /a, ai. tuL 
Sketchley (R. E. D.). See Little Books on 

Art. 

SUpton (H. P. K.). See Little Book* oa 
Art. 

8M«i (D«MglMV MaLY: 
WiQ tar Resort. Witkoverae 
StetmdEMVm. Cr. §m. 0. mL 

8mta mymaX UJL ^THEliaaA An 

■ ■■ ■mm CM. OX BMlMtBoohiM 

Alt. 

Smedley(P. E.). See I.P.L. 

Smltb (Adam). THE WEALTH OF 
NATIONS. Edited with an Introduction 
and niunereus Notes by Edwin Cakman. 
M.A Tm ■(■fciwii. J>mv 9m 

net. 

See al*o Standard Library. 

Smith (Horace and dmrntm). Sea Littk 



Smith (H. BompaaX M.A. A NW 

JUNIOR ARITHMETIC. Crffum 8r*. 
3s. With Answers, ax. 6d. 

Smith (Royda N. O.!.. THft PILLOW 
HOOR : A GA«HttW Sr Moooa. 
Second Edttim. Cr.Btotw A9.6d.mti. 

Smith (itJWil^^ THOUGHTS FOR 

9f . &/. «r/. 

Smith (Nowell CX See W. Wordsworth. 
Smith (John Thomas). A BOOK FOR 

A R-\INY D.>\N:Oi, Rernll'^ctions of the 
Events of the Venrs 1-66-1833. Edited by 
Wilfred Whitten-. ttwimiA 'iM^V 

Demy Stv. lu. ^t/. f.v/. . ^ 
Stiell (F. J.). A LOOICOF ' 

lllustrateii. C r. -r.T. 6x. 
Snowden(C. E.). A HANDY DIGEST OF 

BRITISH HISTORV. Drmy&vc. 4*. 6d. 
Sophocles. See Classical Translations. 

Sornct (L^A^.Sec luanc School , 
South (W8tMiB.XM[A. 

books. , . , 

Southey (R.). EitOUm .^M^' 
Edited by David Haii ww^, Vfell' I t 

i Jrake, CaveDdbkJTSkwiM^ 

Svt>. 61. 

VoL II. (Ridianl Hawking GMlK 

Essex, and Raleigh). Cr. tv». 6r. 

See aUo St.indaid Library-. 
Spence (C. H.), ^L A. See School Examina- 
tion Series. 

Splcer (A. D.). THE PAPER TRADE. 
\\ ith M.ipi aad DiasrtMt. ' <O^Mp'tMi 

t2X. 6</. It/-/. 

Spooner (W. AO^ ILA. BiiT LMii idr 

Religion. 

Staley (Edjrcumbe). THE GUILDS OF 
FLORKNC E Mustratcd. Second Sditum. 
A\'»,i . : • ,', 16--. net. 

SUnbridge (J. W.), B.D. See Library of 

Devotion. 

•Stancllffe,' GOLF DO S ANOOOMTS. 

Secpf:.: f : K. 5iv. la '' 

Stead(I). W.\ .'^re D. Gallahar. ' 
Stedman (A. M. M.l M.A^ 
INITIALATINA: lUn- Lessons on Elemen- 

tary ^rridwca . JtSUk Edition. Fea*. 

FIRST LATIN LESSONS Tenth Ed,. 

Htm, Cr. 9fro. ax. 
FIRST LATIN READI R With Notes 

adapted to the Shortr, I nin Primer and 

Vocahulary. Sixth Edi: un rrz'ited. \%mo. 

It. 6d. 

EASY SELECTIONS FROM CiESAR 
The Hclvedaa Wai^ Stetmd MtKfttm, 

\9fno. It, 

l A^V SFI.FCTIONS FROM LIVY. The 

Kings of Rome, iSmo. Second F.ditron. 
i.r. td. 

EASY LATIN PASSAGES FOR UNSEEN 

TRANSLATION. Ml 

8?'<'. IX. &/. . , V 

FXF.MPLA LATINA. Fiat 
in Lada ^^^'SiIitft, With 
Cr.lMk la 



General Litkkature 



17 



EASY LATIN EXERCISES ON THE 
SYNTAX OF THE SIIORTKR AND 
REVISED LATIN PRIMER. Wiih 
Vocabtttary. El€V€nthmndCh€»p«r EdUicm^ 
re-utitttH. Cr, ivo. it. 6r/. Origitutl 
Edition, ajr. 6d. Kkv, -is. mtt. 

XU& LATIN COMPOUND SENTENCE : 
RvIm aad Exercises. Stcand EdilirM. 
Cr.Svc. \s.f:f. >\"Uh Vocabulary, ax. 

NOTANDA gUALDAM : Miscrllaneou* 
Latin Exerci'ies on Common Kulcs and 
Idion*. J-'ourtk Edititm. FcmP. 8m. 
<fc AA Wtth V«alMdny. M t«r« 

LA I IX VOCABULARIES FOR REPE- 
TI'l ION : Arranged according to Suhjfi ts. 
Fourtttntk Edit ion. J'ca/. 8f'<». is. <>./. 

A VOCABULARY OF LATIN IDIOMS. 
i8j)M> S te tm l Fditim . u» 

STEPS TO GREEK. TUni MdUtm, rt- 

A SHORTER GREEK PRIMER. Sttmd 

Edition. Cr. 8v». 1*. M. 

EASY GREEK PASSAGES FOR XTNSEEN 
TRANSLATION. Third Edition, rt- 
fisfd. Fcaf. ^x-o. IS. 6d. 

GRF.KK VOCABULARIES FOR KF.- 
PE I ITION. Arranged according to .Sub- 
jiTt^ Eou'th Eiit.'tim. Fcaf. Srv. if (ni. 

OKI r.K TKSTAMF.NT SK I.F.CTIONS. 
For the use of Schc^ol^. With Introduc- 
tion, Notes, and Vocabnlaij!, iHtmih 
SdUim. Fcm^»v*. zs.6J, 

STEPf TO FEBRCB. SmmA Mmtm, 

FIRST 

Hon, rrt ittd. Cr. Bw. (l. 

EASY FRENCH PASSAGES FOR UN- 
SEEN TRANSLATION. Pjflk £di- 
tii^H, recited. Fcafi. 8r«. i*. 6a. 

EASY FRENCH EXERCISFS ON ELE- 
MENTARY SYNTAX. With Vocabu- 
Liry. Fourth EMtitm, Cr, %m Mb td. 
Kkv. ij. net. 

FRENCH VOCABULARIES FOR RE- 
PETITION : ArranKcd nccor.iinR to Sub- 
jects. Thirtetnth Edition, hca^.lvo. li. 
S*« al*o School Exair.ination Scries. 

StMl CR» Elliott), M.A.. r.CS. THE 
WORLD OF SCIENCE. With 147 
llhHtiatloBs. Sec«nd Edittw. Cr. 8tw. 9t.6d. 
See also School Examination Series. 

5tepbenson (C), of the Tcchnic.»l College, 
itradford, and Suddarda (F.) of the 
York»hire Collejre. I^eds. ORNAMEN- 
TAL 1)1 SIGN FOR WOVEN FARRICS. 
Illustrated. Detny Bro. Third Edition. 
7*. 6d. 

StepbeiiMn (JA M.A THE CHIEF 
TRUTHS OF THE CHRISTIAN 
FAITH. Cr.tM. 9fc<A 

mwmCLnmee). §«• I JtOt Ubnay. 

Sterry (W.\. M.A. ANNALS OF ETON 
COLLEGE. Illustrated. lUmyZvo. ^s.(>d. 

Eteurt (Katlierine). I'.V ALLAN 
WATER. SteomdEdUwt, Cr,9^ «tk 



Stevenaon (M. 1.). FROM 
TO THE MAROUEISAS 



Stevenson (R. L.) THE LETTERS OF 
ROBERT LOUIS SIKVENSON TO 
HIS FAMILY AND FRIENDS. 
Selected and Edited by SmmT COLrOk 
Third Editiem. Cr. 8r<?. im. 

Library Edition. DtmjfZro. -iX'ols. 3$x.iui, 
A Colonial Edition uakontUiakad. 

VAILIMA LETTERS. Wtth aa Etched 
Portrait Inr WllxiAM Stxanc /(/^ 
Editimt. Cr»%m, Bmckrmmt. fit. 
A Colonial EdUioo ia alao pubUahed. 

THE LIFE OF R. L. STEVENSON. See 
G. Balfour. 

SARANAC 
Being Letten. 

written by Mr<. M. I. SrifVKNSON during 
j3-;- i. Cr. Sxv. 6s. net. 
LE ITERS FROM SAMO^V «89«-95. Edited 
and arranged by M. C- Bai.kouk. With 
many Illusuatioo^ ^ec0«d Edititm Cn 
Sew. 6f . mi, 

Steddart (Am M.). 8«a Ctafad Bie- 

grapbiea. 

Stokes (P. G.), B.A. HOL'RS AVITH 
RABELAIS. From the tran.%iatii>n of Sik 
T. Ulov hakt .niid P. A. Mottfi x. With 
a Portrait in Photogravure. Cr. 8:'i>. 31. td, 
net. 

Stone (S. i.\ POEMS AND HYMNS. 
With a Memoir by F. G. ELLMRWt 
M.A. WitkFoitHUl. Cr,Voe, (a. 

Starr (VaraMi P.X M-A., Lectitrcr m 
tiba Ttiiloao^y of Keligion in OnaMdn 
University ; Kxaailolng Chaplam to fam 
Archbishop of Canterbury; formertyFdBow 
of Un iversit y CoUese. Oxford. DEVELO?. 
MENT AND DlVillS FUKPOSB Crt. 

8tv. 5/. ntt. 
Straker (F.). See Boolcs on Bu«;iness. 
Streane (A. W.), D.D. See Churchman's 

Bible. 

Streatfelld (R. A.). MODERN MUSIC 
AND MUSICIANS. With ^4 Illu-ira- 
tioi;<. Second Edition, DeinyZzw js.6d. 
re ' 

Stroud (IL), D.Sc, M.A. Sec Textbooks of 
Science. 

Strutt (Joseph). THE SPORTS AND 
PA.STLMES OF THE PEOPLE OF 
E N C; LA N D. Illustrated hf fluny caoniv. 
in}:s. Revised by J. CMAaunCoat^ldXt 
F.S ,\. Quarto. 9X$. mtt. 

Stuart (Capt. DoBiadXi TRBSTEVOOLE 
FOR PERSIA. Wi&AMap. 8i y. 6t. 

StardiCP.Xt Staff Immclor to Aa Surrey 
CwMKrCoaacU. MANUAL TRAINING 
DRAWTNO (WOCSrWORK). Its Pnn- 
ciples and Application, with Solutions to 
Examiruttioo Questions, i8<)3-i()o5, Ortho- 
craphic. Ivimetric and Oblique Projection. 
With 50 Plates .ind 140 Figures Fooitcm^ 
5x. net. 

SuddardK (F.). Sec C. Stephenson. 
Surtees (R. S,\ See l.P.L. 
Symes (J. B.% M.A. THE FRENCH 

REV0Um01ff.d 

ts, 6d. 



^Sffit^i^fJ^^S^^ftt^ ^^^^ I 



A3 



i8 



Messks. Methubn's Catalogue 



SympsonCE. M.)i M A., M.D. See Ancient 
Cine. 

Syrett (Netta). See Little Blue Book^, 

Tacitus. A( iKICOl.A. With Introduction 
Notci, Map, etc., by R. F. Davis, M..A., 
Fcnt>. St'fl. IS. 

CERM.\N1A. I?y the same Editor. Fcaf. 
.•ii't'. IS. Sec ;il^ci t 'l.iH>ical 'I ran>>lations. 

TallAck(W.). HOWARD LETTERS AND 
MEMORIES. DemyUf9. iot.6d.iut. 

Tauler (J. ). See Library of Devotion. 

Taylor (A. E.). THE ELEMENTS OF 
METAPHYSICS. DemrUv. jos.6d.Hri. 

Taylor ( F. Q . ), M.A. See Commercial Series. 

Taylor (I. A.). See Oxford Biographies. 

Taylor (John W.). THE COiuVG OF 
THE SAINTS : fiwginariw mA SttidiM 
b Early Chiadi Hittocj mi TMnIUm 
With 26 Illustrations. Z Vwrt Wfc ft. <M M^L 

Taylor (T. M.). M..\., MHow «r OoovOle 
and Caius College, Cambridp. A CON- 
STITUTIONAL AND POLITICAL 
HI'^ I f ) K V O I' ROM K. Cr. Bp*, ft, 6d. 

Tennyson (Alfred. Lord). THE EARLY 
POEMS OF. Edited, with Notes and 
an Introduction, by J. Chlkto.s Collins, 
M.A. Cr. 8r,». 6*. 

IN MEMORIAM, MAUD, AND THE 
PRINCKS.S. Edited by J. Chuktoh 
Collins, M..\. Cr. Srv. 6*. See also 
Little Library. 

Terry (C.S.). See Oxford Bioeraphies. 

Thackeray (W. M.). See Little Librar>'. 

Tkoobald (F. V.)» M.A. INSECT LIFE. 
IlhaMrated. Stemut MtHlkm Xtobtd, Cr. 
tvo. %s. 6d. 

Thompson (A. H.\ See Little Guides. 

TUortooCMaryW;). DAILY STRENGTH 
rOR DAILY NEBDS. ThirUtntk Edi- 
Htm, Mtdium \6m9, ax. 6d. tut. Also an 
•dltiOB in superior tmiding, 6t. 

Tom^na (H. W.X F.R.U.S. See Little 

nuxB*tfuv& witB to iimiiiaimw and 
a Maps. TUnlMdUitm, JDtMurBWk um. 

6d. fut. 

Tvynbee (PaffotX lf.A., DiLitt. See 

Oxford Biographies. 

Trevelyan(0. M.), Fellow of Trinity Collrce, 
Carnbridpe. ENGLAND UNDER THL 
STUARTS. With Maps and Plans. Second 
Edition. Demy 8t'o. lof. td. nrt. 

Troutbeck (0. E.). Sec Little Guides. 

Tyler (B. A.), B.A., F.CS. See Junior 
School Books. 

Tyrrell-Qill (Prance*). See Little Books 
on Art. 

Vardon (Harry). THE COMPLETE 
GOLFER. Illustrated. Bt^kAMIHm. 
Demy Srv. lox. 6*/. ntt, 



A Col onial Edition is also Ml) 
Vanghan (Henry). See Little Ubrnry. 
Vau»lian(HerbertM.), B.A.(Oxon.). THE 
LAST OF THE ROYAL STUARTS, 
HENRY STUART. CARDINAL, 
DUKBOPYO&K. WithaolUMtmdoii^ 



THE NAPLES RIVERIA. With as HI— 
trations in Colour by MLamnCB GaaUfan* 

HAGKN. Cr. %V(<. 6*. 

A Colonial Liiuion is .iKo pu'tllslied. 
Voejfclin (A.), M..-\. Sec Junior Examina- 

Wadden(Col. L. A.). I.I..D.,C.B. LH.VSA 
AND 1T.S .M\ STERIES. Witha Record 
of the Expedition of 1903-1904. With 155 
lUiutrattons and Maps. Third etmd 
Cke»^r Edition. Demy Sew. 71. 6d. met. 

Wade(0. W.), n.D. OLDTESTAMENT 
HISTORY. WithMap6. Fourth Editi^ 

Wa«iier (Rlcliard% MUSIC DRAMAS: 
lotcrpntatioQs, enbodyiag Wagner's ova 
wplMWitfaM % A. L. CuATWW and 
ik Qim /■ A»r Vtkumm, /ta^tML 

Vou L— The Rikg or rm NtasLtmc 

Third Edition. 
Vol. 11. — Parsikal, Lohengrin, and 

Ths Holy Grail. 
Vot„ III. — Tristam and Isolde. 
Wall (J. C). DEVILS, lilosuated by the 
Author and from photOKraphs. Demy Srv. 
4S. 6d. net. Sec also .-\iiticiuary'!. H x^ks. 
Walters (H. B.I. See Little B<x)k^ on Art 

and Cl.i^vi. s uf A.-t. 
Walton (F. W.)- See Scho(d Histories. 
Walton (luac) and CottM (Ckarles). 
See I.P.L., Standard Library, and Little 
Library. 

Warren-Vernon (Hen. WIIUmiV MJL 
READINGS ON THE INFUKO OP 
JDAMTJ^ kMnd «■ tko CoaaoMMHT.or 
Bw ya m rreiiAli ww i — d eth eraiii l ioi m wi 
With an Introduction hr thn tbmh Sib 
MooEB. Id Two S^md 

ntt. 

Waterbonac (Mra. Alfred). WITH THE 
SIMPLE HEARTKD: UtUc HoouUea to 
Women in Country Places. StCt^JUUHtt 

Sutall Pelt Brv. 2^. net. 
Sr- .il, I iitle Library. 
VVeatherliead (T. C), M.A. EX.^MINA. 

ThjN J'APERS IN H0R.\(:L. t -. 8iv. 

■li. .'-<-r .ilso Junior Examination Srrir^. 
Webb (W. T.). See Little Blue I? j->ks. 
Webber (F. C.). See Texlborfcs of Techno- 

locy. 

Wolr (ArchlbaldX M.A. AN INTRO- 
DUCTION TO THE HISTORY OF 
MODERN EUROPE. O*. tM. <*. 

WeUa (Sldaoy H.X Sao Tadbooks of 

Science. 

Wells ( J . ), M.A. .Fellow and Tutor oHVadhara 
College. OXFORD AND OXFORD 
LIFE. Third K-.ation. Cr. itv. v. 6d. 

A SHORT HISTUKV OF ROMF^ Seventh 
Edition. With 3 Maps. Cr. 8tv. 31. 6d. 
See also Little Guides. 

WlieIdon(F.W.). A LITTLE BROTHER 
TO THE BIRDS. With 15 11 
r of which an bgr A. H. BgooAMB. 



Digitized by Google 



General Literature 



19 



WUbtoy CO* Sm W. E. Henley. 

Whlbtoy (L.X M.A., Fellow of Peabrok* 
Coll«n,Ctebridn. GREEK OUGAR. 
^mS: THEIR OROANISATION 
AND CHARACTER. Cn^m, Ct. 

Whltalnria. ILX M.A. 8m OraidMHUi** 

Bible. 

White (ailbert). THE NATURAL 
HIS 1 DRY OF SKLBOKNK. Edited by 
C. .MiALL. K.R.S.,.isM»tedby W. Wa«db 
Fowl KR, M..\. Cr. Bva. 6s. 
Sec aU 1 Standard Librarj-. 
Whitfield (E. E.). See Commerdal Series. 
WhitebeMl (A. W.). GASPARD DF: 
C O L 1 G N V. Illustrated. /><-/«^ Sr ^. 

Whitelcy''(R. Lloyd), F.I.C, Principal of 
the Municiual Science School, West Krom- 
wich. AN KLRMENTARY TEXT- 
HOOK OF INOROANICCHCMI8TRY. 
Cr. 8tv. *J. 6d. 

Whitley (MlM). SeeUdyDUke. 
Whittcn (W.). See John Tbonuut Smith. 
Wk|]rt«(A.a.XB^ SMBoolMODBlHiMM. 

WBMm (WMrMX, 8m Little Books 

wStofOMV). DEPROrUNDIS. Sn>emtA 

V. nft. 

A Colonial Edition it also pobUshed. 
THE DUCHESS Of PADU^ /kMtylew. 

X2t. tti. net. 
POEMS. Demv 8f*. lax. M. ntf. 
INTENTION^ Dtrnvio*. w. 6d. n4t. 
SALOME, AND OTHER PLAYS^ Awy 

8rw. i jj. ttL Hit. 
LADY WINDERMERVS FAN. D«my 

A WOMAN OF NO IMPORTANCE. 

AN IDEAL HUSBANIX 

ISX. 64/. fW/. 

THE IMPORTANCE OP BEING BAR. 

JIE8T. JliwiM. ««/. 
A HOUSE OP POMBGKAIIATIE Md 

THB HAPPY PRIIfCB. Amy Im. 

iw. A#. 

LORD ARTHUR SAVILE S CRIME and 
OTHER PROSE PIECES. Demy 81-*. 
i3f. 6</. net. 

Wllidne (W. H.), B.A. THE ALIEN 
INVASION. Cr. Zvo. 31. 6.1'. 

Winiama (A.). PETROL PETER: or 
Pretty Stories and Fiinnv Pictures. Illus- 
trated in Coluur by A. W. Milljv Dtmy 
^to. y. tit. net. 

Williamson (M. U.). See Ancient Cities. 

Wllllamsoa CW.). THE BRITISH 
GAKDENBR. UhMtwlwi. AmtfiM. 

I Of. dd. 

WilUamson (W.), B..\. See Junior Ex- 
amination Series, Junior School P»K>ks, and 
Beginner's Books. 

D$my lew. it. 6a. 
A CokmiAl Edition is also 



WUmot- Buxton (E. M.). MAKERS Of 
EUROPE. Cr.lM StMtUkJid, ^td, 
A Text-book «f Bwtmui Btrtory far 
IfiddkfenMi 

THE ANOBNT WORLD. Witli Maps and 
lUutntions. Cr.tvo. ys.dJ. 
See also Beginner'^ Books. 

WIIson(Bishop.). See I.ibr.iry of Devotion. 

Wilson (A, J.). See Hook<i on ItuMuev.. 

Wilson (H. A.). See Hooks :n Uusiness. 

Wilson (J. A.). .Sec Simplilicd French 

Texts, 

Wilton (Richard). M. A. LYRA PAS- 
TORALIS: Sungs of Natun^ClniA,HMl 

Home. Pott 8r <j. is. td. 
Winbolt (S. E.), M A. EXERCISES IN 

LATIN ACCIDENCE. O. 8rv. is.td. 
LATIN HF:XAMKTER VERSE: An Aid 

to Composition. Cr. %vo. y. 6t/. Kav, 
51. Met. 

Wllidle(B. C.A.).F.R..S.,F.S.A. SeeAMi. 
qtiary's Books, Little Guides, AadflM 
Uties, and School Histories. 

WtateHMthwa (Cna—X aSc.. 
LL.B. See Cbnrehman'!! Library. 

W—d (Sir Bvnlyn). F.M., V.C., G.C.B., 
aClLa PROM MIDSHIPMAN 10 
PIBLD-MARSHAL. With S4 lUustra. 
tionn and Mapi. Two Vtimmm, MmHk 
Edition. Demyttv. a p. net. 
A Colonial F,<fition is also published. 

Wood (J. A. E.). See Textbooks of 
Technology-. 

Wood (J. Hickory). DAN LENO. lllus- 
tnted. Third Edit icn. Cr. Bvo. 6s. 
A Colonial Edition is also published. 

Wood (W. Blrfcbcck), .M.A., late Scholar of 
Worcester College, Oxford, and Edmonds 
(Major J. E.), R.E., D.AQ. M.G. A 
HISTORY OF THE CIVIL WAR IN 
THE UNITED STATES. WiA Ml 
Introduction by H. SfBHMM WlUUmom. 
With a4 Maps and PIbm. Jht^ 

wSfWWth (GhrtHiplMrX 9m AMi. 

wSSnSlSS^.y, POmSBV. MeoMd 
by Stopmkd a. Bmxncs. Witli 40 Illus- 
trations by Bomoud H. Nsw. With a 
Frontispiece in **Vlt1lfgHI Mfc AMfylMk 

js. dd. net. 
A Colonial Edition is also published. 
Wordsworth (W.) and Coleridge (S. T.). 

See Little Library. 
Wright (Artlinr). M. A, Fdk>w of Queen's 

College, Oillftiigi San €3tmmaatt% 

Library. 

Wright (C. Gordon). See Dante. 
Wright (J. C). TO-DAY. Dtmy i6i.r#. 

II. td. Htt. 

Wright (SMhUX GERMA N VOCABU- 
L.tRItt PORIUCPinTTION. nafk Im. 

IX. 6ot 

Wrong (George M.X Vntmmt of History 
in the Univeisky af Tovonia THE 
EARL OF ELGUr. DhMlRaiad. Dtmy 

A C«ookl BdUoa ii nlM pnbUsbed. 



Messrs. Methuen's Catalooub 



WiMeCA. B.X MODERN ABYSSINIA, 
with a Map and a Ponrait. Dtmy 800. 

A Colonial Edition is al»o published. 
Wyadhan(Rt. Hoa. Qeorge). M. P. TH K 

POEMS OF WILLIAM SHARK- 
SPE.\RE. With an 1 titr.Hincti n ;i:;d 
Note*. Demy Sva. Ihukram, ^ilt top. 

Wyon (R.)an<! Prance (Q.). THE LAND 
OF THE 15L.\CK. MOUNTAIN. Heing 
a Description of Montcnrgr.i. With 
niustrmtions. (V. i- . ■ ./. ntt. 



YmU (W. 
VBKSB. 



B.). A BOOK OF IKISU 



BdltimL CW 

Yeunff (PIlSMi). THE COMPLBTB 

MOTORIST. Wiih I j8 lUnstrationv 
Sixth Edition. Dfmy Sf*. la/. 6</. 
A Colmial K'liti'in !•> aUn published. 
THE JOY OF THE ROAD : Aa Apprecia- 
tion of tba Motar Gaiw SimMDmf^m, 
«. net. 

Young (T.M.). THE AMERICAN 
COTTON INDUSTRY: A_ Siudy^ of 

Work and Workers. Cr.~ 
filler hwirds, xt. fvf. 
Zimmem (Antonla). WHAT DO WE 
KNOW CONCERNING ELECTRl. 



Ancient Cities 

General Editor, a C. A. WINDLE. D.Sc. F.R.& 
Cr. %tH>. 41. (hI. net» 



Chestkr, By B. C. A. Windle, D.Sc F.R.S. 

lllustijted by K. H. New. 
Shki'usbukv. Hy '1'. Audcn, M.A., F.S.A. 

lliuMKited. 

Cantbkuury. By J. C. Caa, LI...D., F.S.A. 
Illustrated. 

BOWMHIOII.. 0> WIUiMHDQ, M.A. 



byltebm 



Ljncolm. By E. Mamel Sympvin, M A., 
M.D. Illustrated by E. H. New 

Hkistoj- lly Alfred Harvey. lUustiatcd 
by E. H. New. 

DoBUM. ByS.A.O.Fiup«tnck. lllattiatad 



The Antiquary's Books 
General Editor, J. CHAKLblS COX, LL.D., F,&A. 

Deniy Stv. 7f. dd. tut. 



LiTB. By die Right 




Kmcush Monastic 

Rev. Abbot 

Third EditiMi. 
Rkmains or THB Prehistoric 

Englanu. By B. C. A. WiodI 

F.R.S. WMl ■■■III MM II 

Plans. 

OtO SBMVICX BoOKn OP THB Enoi.ish 
Church. By Christoph'tr Wocdawonh, 
M.A., .-in<l H<:hry Littlrhaiei^ Wlh 
Coloured and other Illustrations. 

Ckltic Akt. By I. Komilly Allen, F.S.A. 
With numerous Illustrations and Plans. 

Akch>kolocv and Falsk Antiquitibs. 
By R. MunrDk lUiistrated. 

Shkinbs o» HirnsH Saint>. By J. C WalL 



Tub Roval Foxests op ENCXjum. Bf J. 

C Cox, LL.D.. F.S.A Illustrated. 
The Manor and Manoriau Rkcori><v. 

By Nath.aniel J. Hone. Illustrated. 
English Sf.als. I'y J. Harvey Bloom. 

Illui.tratcd. 

The Dombsdat Inqukst. By Adolphus 
l:.ai.^r<l,BlA.,LL.B. With 37 1 llustrataoos. 

Ths Bbakm or Smlaiio. i gy Harty* 
^11 1 IfacMin, M. A. WtduMMyllliuuaiioiWi 

Parish Lipk im MEOiyKVAU England. By 
the Ri^ht Rev. Abbott Gas<juct, O.S,B. 
With m;uiy Iilustr.Ttii>n>i. Sec>>nd Edition. 

Thb Bblui or Englanu* By Caaon I. J. 
Raven, an., F.SA Wi* — 
StUMi -CVtf f fan 



G( nrr.il Editor. W. J. CIIAIG. 
An edition of Shakespeare ia uogle Plajrs. Edited with a fell Introduction, Textual 
Notai, and a Coamentary at the foet of the paget 

Hamlkt. Edited by Edward Dowden. j King Lbar. 

RoMBO^AKO JvuBT. lidttcd by Edward I ^uuus Cabsab. 



Edited by W. J. Craig. 

E<Uted by M. Macaulka. 



^^Dil^^^l ^^J^ ^^^^ 




Digitized by Google 



General Literature 



21 



Otueh.o. Edited by H. C. Hart. 
Titus Anokomicus. Edited by H. I!. liail- 
don. 

CvMBRLiNK. KdUed by Edward DowdciL 
Thr MKHKYWivnorWiHBMB. Sdittdbv 

H. C. Hart. 

AMiDsuMMHR Nir.iit^ Dnuut. Sttadbjr 

H. Cuninghatn. 
Kino Hknuv V. Edited by H. A. Bvaas. 
AtL's Wjcul That J£m» Well. Edited by 

W. O. BHiNochi. 
Thb T amino or THB Shiikw. Edited by 

R. WarwidkBoML 

TmoN or Anaun. Bditad hr K. Deiehton. 
Mkasubb roK MsMon Baited by H. C. 
Bait* 

TwBumi Vravr. Xdiud tqr Motctoo Luce. 



or V) 



Bdted tv K. 



TiiK Mekchaht 

C. Knox Pooler. 
Tkuilus and 
DeightoiL. 

Case. 

Lovb's Labour's Lost. Edited by H. C. 
Hart. 

Ths Two Gentleman op Vbboma. B« 

Warwick Bond. 
Pericles. Bdiud 
The CoMsmr or 



hf JL fL 



Kino ITwmum m. BdM 

Tbompaoow 
KwcJouM. Bdlted by Ifor B. Joluh 



Basv Fbsnch Rhymbs. 

ir 



Edited by W. WILLIAMSON, B.A. 



B] 



Henri BloMC 



Kasv S ioRiKs I- KOM FNGi.mn History. P.y 
E. M. WUmot-buxtuo, Author of ' Makers 
ofEiwopt.* Sm m ul£dm m , Ci\9m» t$. 



■r. 

Easv 

Wi 



Without Answers, tt. With Answers, 
r. yd 

r DfCTATi^i^iiv SrauMa 



u. 

An lAmr Foanrv 



Cr. lavk Mi 



A. J. 



Ports ako D<kks. By Douglas 
Railways. By E. R. McDwmMU 
The Stock Exchanoc Bjr 
Stcond Editimt. 

Thx BtstNaM or twwAWO By 

Wilson. 

Thk Electrical Inui^trv : Lighting, 
Traction, akd Power. By A. G. Whyie, 
a Sc. 

The Shipbdilding IitiNwmr: 
Science, Practice, 
Pollock. M.LM.A. 
Thx MoMftr MamcMV BrF. 
Thb BatraH So 

A. Ok I» R«tM% iI.A. 
Law lit BoknoMb By H. A. 
THB .BnwiNO IitDonw. By 



iima; By 



The AVTOaOMUl iMBOmn; BtObdlB. 

Stone. 

Mining and MmiWI laVUUUim. By 

•A. Moil.' 

The BusiNSiiS or Advertising. By CLirence 
G. Moran, Barrister-at-Law. Illustrated. 

Trade Unions. By G. Dr.nge. 

Civil Encineeking. By T. Claxton Fidler, 
M.Iiut. C.E. Illustnued. 

Thb Ibon Trade or Gbbat Bbitaik. By 
JtSHplieu J<:a>^s> IBoetnued. 

MoNOPOMBS, TbUSOL An KAnBULA. By 

P. W. Hint 
Ths CorroN Industry and Tbaim. By 

Pirot 8. J. Chapman, Dcaa of th* Vacuity 

of Commerce in the UaiffWiliy «f 

cheater* Uluitxated* 



mdkMLhfJ, B. BURT. MJL. UltD. 
A Mrict of texts of fijjmntine Historians, edited \^ tMk^Uk toA facdgn sdiokn. 



Zaoumaii or If irrutML ^ 

BO, D.1X. a« t. W. 



■vACRiiT^. Edited by Lfcn Parmentier and 
M. Bidex. JJemy 8tw. lor. bd, ntt. 



Tms BiRMnr or ?nu.ui. Bditad Iqr C 
Salhai. Dimf99», su. M. 

EcTiiEsis Chronica. Edited by Piafaior 
Lambros. Dttmy 71. 6*/. m//. 

Tin: CiiRd . IC1.E OF MukrA. Edited bfj«te 
bduuitu Vtmy%v0% t^s. tut. 



22 



MISSR& METBUBN^ Ca.TAZX)GUB 



Gwana Edilor. J. H. BURN, BO, F.R.8JL 
iimlbSaw. tu 6d. mtt sack, 

A series of Expositions on the Books of the Bible, which will be of 
feneral reader m the practical and devotional study of the Sacred Text. 



to Ob 



Each Book is pradded whk a foil and dear Introdtictory SecdoQ. in iHiidi it 

stated what is known or conjectured respecting the date and o fMaw io n of the com- 
position of the Book , and any other particulars that may help to etucfdate hs meaning 
as a whole. The Exposition is divided into sections of a convenient length, corre- 
sponding as Car as possible with the divisions of the Church Lectionarjr. The 
TranslatiOB of the Authorised Verrion it priated in ftdl, sack c o crect io m as ara 
deemed necessary being placed inlioolBOtes. 

Tiia Spistui op St. Paul thb Aroma to Iiiaiah. EdUad by W. E. Baraes, DJi. Tmm 
THB GALATiAira. Edited Ity A. W. RoMo- y^iumus. With Map. %t.tuti 
son , M.A. Second Edition. TUB Bnma OT StJAuIL TlOE APOStSJI To 

ECCI.KSIASTKS. Edited by A. W. StnsM. 
D.D. 

Tkb EnsTiJc or St. Pavi. tmk Amma To 
TKB PHiLipriANS. Editad by C K. D. 

Biggt, D.D. Second Editi<m. 

Ths Epistlb op St. Jamu, EdiMd l»y 
H.W.MiM^MJU 



TO St» 



If. A. 

Tut GOSPBL 

Edited Vr J. C da 
net. 

St. Paul''! Episti f<; to the Colos<;ian«; 
anoFmilsmon. Edited bf U. J.C Kaicbi, 



The Ohurchman's Library 

General Editor,]. H. BURN, B.D., F.ILS.E. 
Ctvwn 8tv. 3J. f)d, each. 

Btouition. Br F. B. |i«ea«,1f.A., UttJk 

ThK O I. P T K S T A M K N T A N n T H H N E W ScaOlAa» 

SMif. By J. W. Peters, D.D. 6x. 

Tmk CHimCHMAN'S iNTKOOfCXION TO THK 

Old TasTAMBMT. By A. M. Mackay, B»A. 
Tmb Church or CansT. By B. T. Gtmb, 

CoMPAKATiVB Thbolocv. ^ J. A. Mac> 



Taa B aoww i a oa <» BaousH Christianitt. 

ByW.B.Gollias,lCA. WliliM^^ 
Soica Nav TarrAMaar VaoMJMib By 

Arthur Wi%ht,IXD. dr. 
Tm ICiMGOOM op HKAvaa Kaia AaolfatB- 
APTXR. By Canoa WirtMrbatlMmH ILA., 

B.Sc., LL.B. 
Thb Workmanship op the Praybb Boqk : 
Its Litera^and liturgical Aspects. 1^ J. 



Glassical Traaglations 

Edited faj H. F. FOX, U,K» Fellow and Tuuvof 

Cnnufi Sza. 

A series of Translations from the Greek aiid Latin Classics, distinguished by literary 



College, Oxford. 



JEscHVLUS — Aramemnoo, Choeplwroe, Ba* 
mentdea. Translated by Lewis Campbell, 
LUD. 5*. 

Cicero — De Oralore I. Translated by E. N. 
P, Moor, M.A. :,r CJ. 

Cicero — Select Oraiions (Pro Milone, Pro 
MurcDo, Philippic it., in Catilinam), Trans- 
lated by H. E. D. BlakUtoo, M.A. st. 

Ci> FRO— De Natura Deoruik Trapriafdby 
F. Brooks. M..\. 3*. 6^. 

CicFRO- De Omcib. TraorfMld %f Gb B. 
Gardiner, M.A. u. 6d, 



Horacb— The 06m and 
by A. D. Godlev, U.A. Vr.^ 

Lt ciAN— Six Dialogues (Ni^ntu, Icaro-Me- 
riippus, The Cock, The Ship, The Parasite, 
The Lover of Fab.ehood) ltealaMdby& 
T. Irwin, M.A. 31. 6d. 

Sophoclrs— FJectra and Ajax. TranslaMdlky 
E. D. A Morshead, M.A. aj. 6d. 

Tacitus — Agricola and Gemuinia. Xhaai* 
lated by R. B. Townsbeod. *s. 6d. 

The Satirks op Juvaaai* Tmaihtti 
& G. Owen. at. 6d. 



Digitized by Google 



General Literature 



23 



Classics of Art 

Edited by Dr. J. H. W. LAING 

TmAarertmChoMct. By K.& Whiten. 
With 119 Plates and il IHostntioas in the 
Test. IFMr J?er«/8i>Wi i»$.6d,mi. 



VnASQinB. Bjr A. 4t _ 



Wilh 94 



Series 

BdiMd fay H. OB B. CUBBINS. UaD.,M.A. 

Crowit %V0. 



CoMMKRCIAL EDUCATION IN ThEORV AM) 

Pkactick. By E. E. Whitfield, M.A. 51. 

An introduction to Methuen'a Commercial 
S«ariet treatine the question of Coamercia I 
Education fUqr both lb* pofatt of view 



of the teaci 

British CoMmm and Coi^Ntm from 

Elixabkth to Victoiua. By H. de B. 

GibbiM, littbD., ILA. TUirdEdititn, *t. 
OoMMmscr At. ncAMtwATioir PAnrm. By H. 

de B. Gibbins, Litt.D., M.A. i/. M. 
The Economics op Commbrcx, By H. de 

n. r.ihbiM^UM.IX,MJL JteMNlMMw*!. 

IS. td. 

A German Cdmmkrciai. Reader. B>f & E. 

Bally. With Vocabulary, ss. 
A Commercial Oeot.kaphv of the British 

Kmpirk. By 1- W. Lyde, M.A. />/M 

Edition, it. 
A COMMSaOAL GBOGKAraV or FORSKUt 

VMmm, ■yr.CawakBiA. u. 



A Pkimer op Business. By S. Jackaoa, 

M.A. Third Edition, it. 6d. 
Commercial Arithhbtic. By F. G. Taylor, 

M.A. Etmra£4titiM. js.6d. 
French CoMnwriAi. CowMMinmamHOu By 

S. B. Bdl^ Whh VomMkmf. TUril 

Edition, as. 
German Commercial CoRRBsroHlMnics. B# 

S^^E^lUa^^kk VocMaty. Stetmi 

A French CoVunOKUL Xsaiws. Bjr S. Bi 
Bally. With Vocabvbrr. Second Ed/Horn. it. 

Precis Wkitinc; and Omcic CoRRiisroNi)- 
ENCE. By K. K. Whitfield, M.A. Secrn:% 
Edition. ■St. 

A GUIDK TO PROPEbSlONi AND BUSINESS. 

By H. Jones, %t. 6d. 
The PRiNcifi.ES op Book-keeping by Double 

Entry. By J. E. B. M'Allen, M.A. a*. 
CoMMBRCiAi. Law. By W. Douglas Sdwavds. 



The Connoisseur's Library 

IVi'de Royal 87 0. 2^s. net. 

A sumptuous series of 20 books on art, written byexperts for oollectors, superbly 
illiustrated in photogravure, ctrilotype. aadCOlonr* llw tfiBlMtall llde of the ait fa 

duly treated. The first volumes are — 
Mezzotints. By Cyril Davenport. With 40 

Plate<> in PhotoKravurc. 
PuRCKi.AiN. I>y Edward Dillon. With 19 

Plates in Colour, lo fai CoUotypo, aad 5 in 

Photogravure. 
Miniatures. By Dudley Heath. With 9 
Plates in Colour, 15 in Collot>-pe, and 15 in 
Photogravure. 
IviiRiES. By A. Maskell. With 80 Plates in 

Collotype and Photogravure. 
Engusk FywtrruRE. By F. S. Robinson. 
With ilfm yiMes in Collotypa aad MM in 
Stemd £4tn$m 



European Enamels. By Henry H. Cunyng- 
hame, C. Fl. With 54 Plates in Collotype 
and Half-lone and 4 Plates in Colour. 

Ooldsmiths' and Silversmith^ Work. By 
NdaoQ Dawioa. With mm Jt%nm ia 



gravure. 

English Coloitred Books. By Martin 
Hardie. With 38 IBatwiioaa fa CoIom 
and Collot>'pc. 

Glass. By Edward Dillon. With 37 IHok- 
tntfoas la CoUoty|« aad ss b Coloar. 



Tkk Con 
byC 



Hm Lilmiy of OmlioB 

With Introductions and (whovMoenaTy) Notes. 

Small Pott %vo, cloth, 2s. ; leather, 2s. 6d. net. 

OF Sr. Augustine. Edited | The Lmifation op Christ. Edited by C. 
,D. Fifih Edition. Bigg, D.D Fourth Edition. 

YSAib XdilMl Iqr Walt«| A Book.of DsvpnoM. B^tod by J. W. 



Messrs. MsTHUfiif's Qltalogue 



Thk Lirkaiiv or DsvortOH— cM/tmuA 

Lyra iNNocBWtfDMk BdM Vf 

IaxV. D.I). 

A Skki<)U'> Cai I T'> A Dkvoi't Asi> Holy 
Life. Kdited by C Bigg. D.D. J-'frnHk 
Edition. 

Tub Temple. Edited by E. C S. Gibson, 

D. D. Sectnd Editun. 
A r.crnE TO SimBMnv. Edited by J. W, 

Sianliri(lf%B.I>. 
The P&aum or r)Avin, Edited by B. W. 

Randolpbi IX D. 
LVKA AffOnouCA. By Cardinal McmOBn 
Edited by Canoo Scott Hdhad 

The Thowmts or Pascal. Edited by C 
S. Jenami M*A. 

Os THK Lo\'K OF God. Bv Si. Francis de 
S i!- V K Iited by W. J. ICnox-Liltle. M.A. 

A Ma SUA I. or CoKiiot^TloN r«OM the 
Saints and FaWM. EdiMl tw J. H. 
Bum. B.n. 

The Song or S««. MM bf B. BiHted. 

M.A. 

The Devotions or St. ftii— m. Bdjlrf by 

C. C. J. Webb. M..\. 
Grace A u i'>ylolHiBwiH 

by S. C. Freer, M .A. 
BisMOP Wilson's SaCEA BHVAaMU 

byA.JLilai«,B.D. 




L%'KA f^ACKA : A Rook of Sacred Ver>e. 

Edited by H. C. BeechinKi M A., Camn of 

Westinin^'.er. 
A DAYBfKiK fromtheSain rs AND Fathers. 

Fxiited by I. H. Burn, B.D. 
Heavenly Wisdom. A Selection from the 

English Mystics. Edited by E. C. Gregory. 
Light, Lirs, and Lovk. A Selection from tbe 

German Mystics. Edited by\V.R.lDge,M.A. 
An Introduction to The Dxvpinr LiF& 

By St. Francis de Sales. 

Edited by Y. Bams. M.A. 

MaNCHBSTBE At. MuNIM>: A 

«r OMih and 

BmI if 

hf Blifbuh 
Rdiior of * A LittfoBookorLHeaiMlDntlL* 

The Lrrrut Fijowbss or the Gloxiocs 
Me.<»er St. Francis and of kis 
Friars. Done inM K i;'.i h by W. Hey- 
wood. With an IrurcxlucUon by A. G. 
Ferrers Howell. 

The Spikii l al Guide, whi^ h ili,><:i;i.in^ «> 
the Soul and bnti^s it by the Inward Way 
to the Gelling of Perfect 0'tii«'mpl.ttis>n 
and the Rich Treasure of Internal Peace. 
Written by Dr. Michael de MoHnos, Prie«-t. 
Translated from the Italian copy prlnte«l at 
Venice, i6Ss- Printed in the year 
MDCLxxxviii. EdiMd tho Boo. Sfam 



The Illustrated Pocket Libraxy of Plain and Ck>loared Books 

Fcap Smt. . (td. rui each volume. 
A leriei. In mMll form, of tone of the fiunoni lllmtraied bookt of fioliaa and 

general litcr.itJire. These are faithfnny reprinted from the first or 
witbouil iutroducuoa or ooies. The Illustrations arc chiefly ia cokMir. 

COLOURED BOOKS 



Old Coloured Books. By Georgt 

With i6 Coloured Plates. Fca*.9w. 9i.uet. 

The Life and Death of John Mvtton, Esq. 
By Nimrod. Witk st Colottrod Ptatct by 
ifaMj A Bdm md. T. J. Biwliii JWM 

Tm Lim or A fiMOVUMM. Br Miiwod. 

With 35 Coloured Ptatet by Henry Aiken. 

Handlev Qftt»h. By K. S. Surteet. With 
17 Coloured Plates and 100 Woodcuts in the 
Text by John I^ech. Second Edition. 

Mr. Sponoe's Siukting Tour. Py K. S. 
Stirtee*. With 13 Coloured Plates and 90 
\V . !rut^ ill the Text by John l.cech. 

JoKKiK k-.' J Ai'sT-; ANi> Jollities. ByR.S. 

Slirtrrs. W ith is ('"'l .>UI«d MMW or U. 
Aiken. Sfionii /•,i;V//,'f(. 

This volume is i< [>!iritcd from the ex- 
tremely rare and cosily ctiitiuii of 1843, wbiich 
contains Aiken's \ery li;i>' illaEMliOEA 
instead of the u«ual ones by Phi/. 
Ask Mamma. By R. S. Stirtees. With tj 
Caiowed Pkics aad 70 Woodcuta in tlM 



The Analysis of the HuniiNU Field. By 

R. S. Siirtce*. With 7 Cdoured ~ 
Henry Aiken, and 43 litu^trationci 




The Toue or Dib SnrrAXj* as 
THE PicrusssQinL Br WIBiEai 
WUh |oGol«md FlMtM 

Tm Tou« or doctok Stwtax ts 

OF CoNSOLATTOw. By Wllltain 
With S4 Coloured Plates by T. Ron 

The Third Toi r of Doctor Syntax in 
Skakch of a Wife. By William Combe. 
With J4 Coloured Plates by T. Rowlandson. 
The History of Johnny Qi'ak nEM'« : the 
Little FoundlinK of the late Dr. .Sj-ntax. 
By the Author of The Three Tours. ' With 
24 Coloiireil Pl.ites by Kowl.-iniKon. 
The Kngi ish Dascf. ok Di ath, from the 
Desijjns of T. RowLindson. with Metrical 
lllu'itr.ition'; by the Author of 'Doctor 



Sytit.- 



This lM>:>k c«>ntains 76 Coloured Plates. 
The Danck ok Life : A Poem. By the Author 
SintAS.' ilhistimtwl with af 



Digitized by Google 



OSHBlAt LIRIATDIB 



«5 



>lio edition of ' National Sporu ' by 
le wtiMt nd MM of dw fkUM «• 



^ r A Mr* Cavtaim. By 

ANavalOAow. Whh •« CUoarad Pktaa 

by Mr. WltKams. 

Gamoma t or. the Art of Preserving Game ; 
and an Improved Method of tnakini; Plaiita- 
lions and Covers, explained and illustrated 
by Lawrence RawMome. Eat^ Wuk is 



lixosntATBD PocKBT LiBXAXT OF Plajn AND CoLou w> BooKJ imH)m$£ 

Ltrs IN LoMDOM : at, Um Day and Night 

Somea of Jerry UmmAam, mo., md hi* 

Bkcaat FriaiMi, Oorithlan Tab. By 

Kane Boan. with 36 Coloured PlatM by 

I. R. and G. Crulkshank. With numerous 

Dcstens 00 Wood. 
Rkal Life in London : or, the Rambles 

and Adventures of Bob Tallyho, Esq., and 

his Cousin, The Hon. Tom Dashall. By an 

Amateur (Pierce Egan). With 31 Coloured 

Plates by Aiken and Rowlandson, etc 

Thr Likb or AN Actor. By Kerae Egaa. 
With 97 Coloured Plates by Thaodanlnt, 
and several Designs on Wood. 

Thb Vicak of Wakbfiiclo. By Oliver Gold- 
smith. With ■4Colow«dPkMs by T. Row- 
landson. 

Thb Miutakv AovsNTuns or 
Nbwcomb. ByanOflBoer. VITUiis* 
Plates by T. RowhuMleua. 

Thb National Snmnim 
With DeacriptioBf aad s> 

by Henry Aucen. 

This book h completely diffierenj from the 
large folio edition of 

the "iami 
similar. 



by Lawn 
Cwowad 
An Acai>bmv worn di 
taining tb* eeaBpleleM InttroctiBU far 

VfaOsmf, Trotting, Centering, Galloping, 
Stnmbling, and Tumbling. Illustrated with 

97 Coloured Plates, and adorned with a 
Portrait of the Author. By Geoffrey 
Gainbado, Esq. 

Real Lira in Irbland, or, the Day and 
Night Scenes of Brian Boru, Esq., and hja 
Elegant Friend, Sir Shawa fTfTMjwill 
By a Red Paddr. With ODloaMdrPlHaa 
by Heath, Marks, etc. 

Tub Advkktubbs or Johnny Nswcomb in 
THB Navy. By Alfred Burton. WMi td 
Coloured Plates oyT. Rowlandson. 

The Old English Sqoirk : A Poem. By 

iohn Careless, Esq. Witli lo Coloured 
'lates after the style of T. Rowlandson. 



VLAIV BOOXI 



Thb Grave : A Poem. By Robert Blair. 
Illustrated b^ la Etchings executed by Louis 
Schiavonetti from the original Inventions of 
William Blake. With an Engraved Title Page 
and a Portrait of Dlake by T. Phillips, R.A. 

The illustrations are reproduced in photo- 
gravure. 

Iluiitbations op the Book or Job. In< 
¥Sltt»d and engra vorl by WiUlam Blake. 

These ftBKNia Illustrations— 31 in number 
— are r ep fOdMad in photogravure. 

^sop's Fablbs. With 380 Woodcuts by 
Thomas Bewick. 




The Towf.r or London. By W. Harrison 
Ainswortb. With 40 Plates and 58 Woodcuts 
in the Text by George Cruiksbank. 

Frank Fairlkgh. By F. E. Smedley. With 
30 Plates by George Cruikshank. 

Handy Andy. By Samuel I^ver, With 24 

Illustrations by the Author. 
Thb Complbat Amcuer. By Isaak Walton 

and Charles Cotton. With 14 PhlW Md JJ 

Woodcuts in the Text. 
This volume is reorodticedl 

ful edition of John M^jor of 183^ 
Tub Pickwick Papbrs. ByCharlesI 
tba 43 lUoitradons by ~ 

PUif the two 



Jnnior Examination Series 



Edited bty A. M.M.ST£DMAN.M^ /h|^SMk u. 



Jmnoa Fkbnch Examination Pa 

F. Jacob, M.A. Second Edition. 
Junior Latin Examination Papers. 

G. Botting, 6.A. Fourth EdiUtm, 
toxioR Kncush ExAMOUmOllPAm 

W. William-son, RA. 
Junior Arithmetic Examination Fi 

By W. S. Beard. Third EtUtim. 
Junior Alcsbra EXAMHAflMt R 

S. W. FiMt ILA. 




Junior Greek ExAMiNATioirFi 
C. Weatberbead, M.A. 

Junior GBNBBiU. Information 
TMMPAtns. B7W.S.B«aid. 
A Ibnr TO rm aaom ifcdAiMril 

I Junior Geography ExAMmAnON Pi 
By W. G. Baker, M.A. 

By I Junior Gbruan ExAMttAVlM Pi 

A.:^oi«Bim id.A. 



By 

ByC. 

. Br 



!&e^M. ' 

.4 



MESS&& M£THU£li'S CATALOGUE 



talor Scbool-Booiki 

BM hf O. D. 1K8R1P. LL.D.. and W. WILUAliSON. hJL 



A Class>Booic of Dictation Fas' kce'.. By 
W. WUluuiuon, B.A. Tw*Ot^ Edition. 
Cf. 8t'»>. is. 6.y. 

The Gospel According to St. Mattkkw. 
Edited by E. Wilton South, MJL 
Three Maps. Cr. 8va. it. td. 

TmeG'isi-f.l AccoRDiNo toSt. Makk. Edited 
by A. E. Rubie. D.D. With Three Maps. 
Cr. 8f*. xt.M. 

A Junior English Grammah. By W. William- 
ion, B..^. \yith numerous possa^ for panins 
and anaK*ait,aiKi* chapter on Essay Writing. 
Third EtUHtm. Cr. ^vo. 

A luNioK Cmuomv. ByE. A.Tyl«r,B.A.. 
r.Ca WtthySIIlBiiwtinM tUfdiSl 

Tra AcTC or ram Aiotttn. Bttad by 

A E.B«hte,IUX <>.tM. M. 
A Ji;NiaB FUMOl O^i—fi By L. A. 



Blementaky Experimental Science. Pjiv- 
sics by W. T. CJough, A.R.C.S. Chemistry 
by A E. Dunstan, B.Sc. With 7 PiAtesaad 
154 Diagrams. Fourth Editten. C>. Sew. 
2J. 6d. 

A Junior GBOHJtTmr. By Noel S. Lydob 
With 276 DiapHH. .fViil ffrfUfw Cr. 

%vit. ax. 

Elementary Experimental Chemistry. 
By A. E. Ehinstan, B.Sc. With 4 Plates 
and X09 Diagrami. Cr, 8ro. a. 

A It-NioR FRncB Pbobl By R. R. N. 
Baron, M. A. SteMtdMMiion. Cr. ioc. ss. 

Ths Gospel Acco«ihmo to St. Lukb. WUh 
an Introdudioii and Note* fay WUIiBa 
WUlaaawia,B.A. Wilk Tlmm tUft. Cr, 

Tmb Fwsr Book or Kmc^ Edilad by 
A. K. RusiB, IXTk WtOk Maps. Cr. ~ 



Leaden of Beligion 

BdiMI^R.C. MBBCRING. M.A. 



H. 



By R 

H. Overton 

By G. 



Cr. 

Hutton. 

M.A 
W. Daniel 1, 



Cardinal Nkwma.v. 
oHN' ^S'p'^^^.Y. By J 

isnnp WlLBKRFOKCB. 

M.A. 

Cardinal Manning. By A. W, Hutton, M.A. 
Charles Simeon. By H. C. G. Monle, D.D. 
John Keplk. By Walter Lock. D.D. 
Thomas Chai mkrs };y Mrs. Oliphant. 
Lancelot Andrbwes. By R. L. Ottley, 
D. D. Second Editi9H, 

Aogvmiw^ CAMmwoBT. ^ B. JL 



2J. nft, 

William Laud. By W. H. Hutton, M..\. 

Third Edition. 
John Knox. ByF. MacCunn. SfconJ Edition. 
John Howe, By R. F. H .rton, D.D. 
Bishop Ken. By F. A. Clarke, M.A. 
Gborcb Fox, the Quakbk. W^X. ^r^ff^i 

D. C. L. Third Edition . 
John Donnb. By Angixstus Jesaopp, D.D. 
THOMAS Cr anmbr. BVa. I. Mmqii, DJX 
BiSHOF Latimer. ftfIL H.OMtyiaMd A 

Bmror flvtin. ByW.A 



Hie Little Bltie Books 



tt. 



u Twm Cmtawaw 9w 

TbMHiCobli. 
B. Ths BncHNVT Boos, ly Ji 

BdiBdtvXi V* LocM. 

3. Tni Am OviL BgrT. HIIlMrt. 

4. A School Tsub By Nttta Syrett. 

5. Thb PBBUKATTMlCArrrAL. By Roger 



& Tub TRXMmoi or » «un — w 

ByT. Cobk 

7. Mrs. Barrerrt's C.ENKRAt, Shop. By 

Roger Ashton. 

8. A Book or Bad Chiumbm. By W. T. 

UMIe Books on 4rt 

\ series of monographs in miniature, containing the complete outline of the 
ittbject under treatment and rejecting minute details. These books are produced 
viu dw i iMt tt H care. Each volume consists of about 900 pages, and firaoi 

30 to 40 illustrations, including a frontispiece in photogravure. 

Gresk Art. H. B. Waltwri. Third Editi»n. I Watts, R. E. D. Sketchley. 
BouKfLATBS. B.Almack. LKKUmnk Alice Corkran. 

.J. SiiM. S^tml Rdittm. j VuMQOn. WBftid WiU»Kfecca aad A. K. 

t 



Digitized by Google 



General Literature 



CoKOT. AlkcPoUardandBlhal 
Rathakl. a. R. DryhoMk 
MlbUCT. MfUa Paaceck. 

bumiwn«»MSS. j.W.Biaidbro 
Cbbist in A*t. Ifn. Bcorj J«aMr, 

fctx.Ltnv. Cjnfl DmvMtpoit. 
OOR. Edward Dillon. 
Akts okJapan. Edward Dilioo. 



Ltm.! Boon oh km—Cffmtinued. 

Gmwnm mto Boocftn. Eliu F. Fdlacd. 
Vanovck. M. G. Soudlwood. 
TVnrEit. FraiMwT]rn«U<iiU. 
DOsm. JeidaAliRi. 
HoFf NBu Ha P> K* Sklptoiu 
HoLftEiN. Mrb O. Foctatcm. 

BVRNK-JOKBS. FOCIBBA* d* 

Tbd Idttte GalleziM 

JRlMtF fi* Milf« 

A ^ies of little books containing examples of the best work of the great painters. 
Badk volttine cootaiiis m> plates in pbotooavure, together with a short outline of the 
Ulb and work of the nwstOT to %rhem the it danitod. 

A I ITTLE GAtLKKV OF RkYNOLDS. I A LtTTLK GaLLKHY OF MiLLAIS, 

A LiTTLS GAU.SKV OF RoMNKY. I A LtTTLS GAJJJiaV OF KnGUSU PoVTS. 

A Lrrrui Qsuxn or Hornraa* I 



The Little Guides 
Whh Mttf lUnttrattoitt bf E. R. Nkw aad odMT wtiitft «^ 

Messrs. MKTliuirN are publishing a small series of books under the general title 
ofTuK Little Guides. The nuun feattares of these books are (x) a handy and 
form, (2) artistic IlluslCBtfem lif Bi H. Nbw and others. (3) good plans 
and maps, (4) an adequate but compact presentation of everything tmit iaiatareK' 
iag in the natuml featims* hi^ry. archeology, and arcbiteetm of lha town or 
district treated- 

9y B. W. 

Tarn Isuc or Wight. Bf & CttMk 
I Kairr. ByG. Clinch. 

I Kerry. }?y C. P. Cranr. 
, MiODLESKx. By John 15. F irth. 

I NoRTiiAMPTo.NSHiKE. Hy WahsHRgDn 

i NoRroLK. By W. A. Dmt. 
OxpoNosHiR£. By F. c. Bvataai, IfJL 

I Suffolk. By W. A. Dutt. 
SuRRBY. By F. A. H. Ljunbert. 
Sussex. By F. G. Brabant, M.A. 
Edition, 

Thb East Riding of Yorksiiirf. 
Morris. 

TliaNOKTSRiDTNr. or VoRKSRiaa. 




CAMaatBGS AMD 

KMinilton TbempMa. 

OXMMID AND ITS CoiXaCKS. 

M.A. Stventk Edition. 
^T. Paul's Catmkdral. By Grorpyr r!incli. 
Wkst.minster AnBBV. By G. E. Jiuutbcck. 

Thr F.ncmsh Lakes. By F.G. Brabant^. A. 
TiiH .MAt.vER.s CooNTirv. Bt B. C A. 

W.ndle, D.Sc., F.R.S. 
Shakrsfkakk's Coustrv. By B. C. A. 
Wiadle, D.Sc., F.R.S. Second Editipn. 

BucKiMouaMsmRB. By E. S. Roecosii 
CiiKsimik By W. M. GimchsM 
CoKNWAU. BrA.L.nslwsa 
Daaavsama. By J. CWrlw tSaa^ LLJX, 
F.S.A 

DsvoK. By 8. Baring-Goqld. 
DoRsrr. By Fmak R. H«aA- . ^ 

HAMfSMiBB. By J. ClMika Ooa^ XJL]K« 
F.8JU 



Second 



By J. P.. 

ByJ.E. 




By C . 
Skwiv B|rF. 



M^th Introdnedoos, Notes, and Fb utufia f ur o Vkqntiqpleees. 

Small Pott SrtJ. Each Volume^ cloth, \s. 6d. net ; leather, 2s. dd. net. 



ENGLISH LYRICS, A LITTLE 
OF. 

_ jMNik PRU>B AMD F&XJU- 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. Edited by E. V. 
Lucas. 

^^^^ MS^VSOFLOBD 



aa 



M£88R& MKHIIBII'8 CATALOGUB 



Trb Littlb Li braky— <mi<IAmm£ 
Barbain (R. HA THE INGOLDSBY 
LSGSND5. JUUiBd by J- & Ahat. 

tFr"^ 



■femttCMrs. P. A.). ALITTLBBOOK 

OF BVGLISH PROSE. 
Beckford (William). THE HISTORY 
OF THE CALIPH VATHEK. Edited 
by E. Denison Ro&s. 

MBf (WiUiMlIu SSLBCTIONS FROM 
WILLIAM BLAKE. Edited by M. 

PSRUGINI. 

Borrow (Qeorg«). LAVENGRO. Ediied 
Ly K. HiNOKs Grooms. Tnw ! oi'uwt. 

THE ROMANY RYE. Edited by John 
Sampson. 

FROIr TmT EARLY FOBMS OF 
ROBERT BROWN I Na Eililii hf W. 

Hall Griffin, M.A. 

Cntniaf (QeorM). SELECTIONS FROM 
THE ANTriACOfilN: »itk Gaoacs 
Canning's addilioMd Fmm. EdlMd Vy 
Llovd Sandus. 



Crabbe (Qoorve). SELECTIONS FROM 
GEORGE CRABBE. Edited by A. C 

DSANB. 

Cndk(Mr«.). JOHN HALIFAX. 
GENTLEMAN. Edited hf AmiB 

Matkkson. Tiv0 I'olumes. 
CtmIuiw (Richard). IHE ENGLISH 
POEMS OF RICHARD GKASHAW. 

Edited by Edwakd Huttom. 

Urate (Allgfaleri). THE INFERNO OF 

THXPUllGATORIO OF D ANTE. Trans- 
nted by H. P. Cakv. Edited by Pagkt 
TOVNBKK, M.A, D.LitL 

THE PARADISO OF DANTE. Tkaos- 
latrd by H. F. Caky. EdMMrf IkV FJiar 

ToV.NltKE, M.A., P.J itt. 

Oarley (QeornV SELECTIONS FEOM 
THEPOfiiiS OF GEORGE DARLKY. 
Bdkad hjr R. A StKBArniLo. 

(A. C). A LITTLE BOOK OF 

LIGHT VERSE. 

MclMuC 

7W V»lum«t. 

fMM* (8m«ii>. marriage. Edited 
07 A. Goodrich . Fkf.er aadl Lento 
Iddrslkich. Tw Volumts. 

THE INHERITANCE. 7W Volnnut. 

OigcaUgn^X CRAMFORJD. Bdi««lby 



I to ii tl M W ■ § (Natlmirien. THE SCARLET 
LETTER. Edited by Percy Deasmcr. 

Henderson (T. P.). A LITTLB BOOK 
OF SCOTTISH VERSE. 



an Intro- 

vcA Not«c by J. 



Kente (John). POEMS 

daction by L. Binyon, 

Masrvuu). 
KEnffkOce (A. W.). EOTHEN. With ui 

Introduction and Notes. Ste»nd Edition. 

E. V. Lucas. 
Locker fP.). LONDON LYRICS 
by A. D. GoDt.EY, M.A. 
First Edition. 



A repriitt «f th* 



POEMS OF 
kFS. 



L. M. FAITHrCLL. 

iMwell (AaOfVwX THE 
ANDREW MA&VBU* 
Wright. 

Milton (John). THE MINOR POEMS 

OF JOIN MILTON. Ediied by H. C 
Bejkching, M.A., Canon of Westminster. 

Moir(p. M.). MANSIEWAUCH. Edksd 
by T. F. HsMDSssoN. 

litafeSMJ. B. B.V AUTTLBBOOKCtf 

EMOLISH SONNET& 

RochefoacanldCLa). THE M.\XIMS OF 
LA ROCHEFOUCAULD. TkUHlaiod 
by D«sii ScMOMM BdBti by GL B. 

Powell. 

Smith (Horace end JaoMeV REJECRD 
A i y R£5SE& Edited 1^ A. UGoBur. 

Sterne (Laarence\ A SENTIMENTAL 
JOURNEY. Edited by H. W. Paul. 

Tennyson (AUred, Lord). THE EARLY 
POEMS OF ALFREIX LORD TSNMY- 
SON. Btfied hihtmanm OuMb 

M.A. ^ 
IN MBMORIAM. ■MbrK.C 

BxKnpaiM.A. ^ 
THBn3HCSS& BdM by XtBaam 

MAUU. MkcdbyEuZABKTMWairDeWORTH. 

Thackeray (W. M. ). V A N I T Y FAIR. 
Edited by S. (^wvMN. Tkm ythamgt, 

PEN!) ¥. s N I s. Bditod ly 8. Owtn. 

Three I olumex, 
ESMOND. Edited by S. Gwykk. 
CHRISTMAS BOOKS. Editedl^&GWMMi 
VauKhan (Hemy). THE POEMS 

HANRyVaUGBAM. BdkidbytewitM 

HUfflUM. 

Walton Ozaak). THE COMPLBAT 

ANGLER. Edited by J. Bochan. 
Waterhouse (Mrs. Alfred). A LITTLE 
BOOK OF LIFE AND DEATH. Ediied 
by. NitUkEdmm, 
Alieon Js f a n il Piy; JLmAtr. 9k 



W«rdsworth(W.). SELECTIONS FROM 
WORDSWORTH. Edited by Now ell 

C. Smith. 

Wordsworth (W.) and C 
LYRICAL W&liAm, 
Samumon. 



GBHBRAL LnXKATURB 



The Little Qn&rto Shakespeare 

Edited by W. J. CRAIG. With latroductioos and Notes 

Atf l6mo. In 40 Volunus. Leather ^ price \s. net each 
Maiugutty Rtnohiimg Btak Cau, lOf. im/. 



Miniature Libnzsr 
a few interestini 



Reprinu in miniature of a few interesting books which have qualitieeof 

ormeraryi 



EuniRANOR : A Dialogue on Youth. By 
Edw^ird KioGerald. 1- rom tb« editionpob- 
lohcd bv W. Pickering in llfb Otmy 
33M4*. LtaiJur, 2s, tut. 

Poumius: or Wise Saws and Modem In- 
stances. By Edward Fit/Oraltl. From 
the edition published b>' ]'i krring 111 
1851. Dtmy ■i2m». LtaHi^r, 7s. ntt. 

Thb RoaAnrAT or Omar KhawXm. By 
B dwi d FUaGeraU. From tl»e ut cditka 
af rf!sii nMJUWMh Lmtkm\ iaimA. 



Thk Life of Edward, I ord Herbert of 
CiiKRiiUKV. Writtci: by himself. From the 
edition printed at Strawberry Hill ia the 
year 1764. AfeJtMm -iimo. Leathtr, s*. n€t. 

The Visk'Ns ok Dom Francisco Quevkdo 
ViLLKGAs, Knight of the Order of St. 
James. Made English by R. L. From the 
cdiuon printed for H. Herringman, i663. 
Leather, sj. mt. 

Poaii& By Doia GtmowcU. Vnoi tlM odi- 
doiiarfM. 



OBMBupi^iUM 

Alichieri. By Paget Toynbee, M.A. , Robert Burns. By T» F« 



Dante Alichieri. By Paget Toynbee, M.A, 
D.Litt. With i> Illustrations. Second 
Editicn. 

Savo.harola. By E. L. S. HorsburRh, M.A. 

With II Illu.Mrations. Second Edition. 
John Howard. By E. C. S. Gibson, I>. D., 

Bishop of Gloucester. With la Illustrations. 
Tennyson. By A. C. Benson, M.A. With 

9 Illustrations. 
Walter Rai.eich. 

I a Illustrations. 
Erasmos. By E. 

lUnitzmtMna. 

lie 



By I. A. Taylor. With 
F. U. Capey. With \t 



Bf C & T«iVi| 



Robert Burns. By 
With 13 Illustratiotu. 
Chatham. By A* & 

Illustrations. 
St. Francis or Assist. Ky 

dart. With 16 lUuatnuions.. 
Canning. By W. 

Illustrations. 
BSACONSriELSb Bf WalMi 

Illostratioos. ^ 
G0BTH& BF d 

trations. 
Fknelon. By 



Wllb t« 
K. 8ie4- 



sa 



8k Cjytek Whh 



School Examination Series 

Edited by A. M. M. STEDMAN. M.A. Cr. %vo. 2J. &/. 
Frbiich Examimatiom Pavsm. By A. M 



M. Stedman, M.A. FlmrUtmtk Edition. 
A Key, issued to Talon and Private 
Stndcota only to be had on application 

LaTIM EXAMINATKHt PAVnik Bf A» M. M. 

Stedman, M. A. T MiM m tk MMUim . 
Key (Sixth #4MnO iWMd a» ahove. 

6s. net. 

Grkek FIxamination PArsRS. By A M. M. 
Stedman, M.A. Ninth Edition, 
Key {Third F<lifiw) ImhA a 
(a. net. - * , 

Crrman Examination PAraaa By S. J. 



Km {TUtd JSelitim) iwMd as abora 

e^ 

History and Gkogkapmy Examinatk-!* 
Pafers. By C H. Spence, M.A. Second 
Edition. 

Pmrncs Exahimatiok PAMaa. Bf S. 

Steel, M.A., F«C.& 

General Knowledge 
Pai krs. By A. M. M. 
Si.rth Edition. 

Kav i^omrik MdHim) tssaad as ab«v«* 

SXAXtliATiON Papers in F.ngi i 11 HtaraBF* 
By J. Tait Plowdea-WajnUaw, B.A. 



Examination 
Stedman, M.A. 



Digitized by Google 



« 



MBS8B& MSTHUXIf't CATALOQUB 



School Histories 

Illustrated^ Crown 8vo. \s.(ieL 



A School HisToav or Waxwickshiiib. By 

B. C. A, Windk, D.Sc., F.R.S. 
A School History or Somerset. By 

Walter Raymond. 
A School HisrottT or Lahcasuikc by 



A School Hi-.tory or Middi 
G. Plarr and F. W. WaUoa. 



by a p. OOODCmLDb M. A.. ESa. and O. R. IIILLS^ MJL 



PRACTICAL MeciiANrcs. By Sidney BU 

Third Edition, O. Szv. y.ttd. 
PHAcncAju Physics. By H. Sll«rii I>.S6.. 

PMcncM OoMwrar. fiMt t Br W. 
1Mb, M.A. Or. Bm. /"mtAI Riitiim. 
t«.&dl FBrtii. BrW. French, MJL, and 

T. H. BoRrdman, M.A. Cr. 8t>o. u.ftd. 
TlClt!«1CAL AltiTHMBTtC AND GBOKBTBY. 

By C. T. Mfflki I1.I.M.& CK tiw. 

Examples in Phtmcs, By C B 
Cr. 8m. U*td, 



Plant T.iff, Studktli Gsuden and Schc 



Diagrams. ( 



Jonet. F.CS. 



3'- 



67. 



By r. 



ThK CoMlLUB bCHL'OL ChEMISTRV. 

Oldham, I'.A. Illu«iiraled. Cr. Sr,^ 
.\n Organic Chkm; .tkv kor Scm <h.s and 
Technical I s^rn l tes. HyA. L. l'un?,iaii, 
B.Sc.(Lond.), F.C.S. Illustrated. tV.Sroi. 
Elbmen'takv Science rcR Pupil Teachers. 
Physics Section. By W. T. Clougb. 
A R.C.S. (I^dJ, F.C.S. Cm«>iist»v 
Sectiom. ByA. E. DvMtaiv &Sc. CLood.X 
F.CS. Witts VhtWMidM^ 



B4tedtvT. R. K. CBOfTS^ ILiL 

Shilling each. 

La Chammmi 
RkmMUA. 



L'HjnoiMifllMlTvurs. Adapted bgrX. IL 



m5* 



MtUiaen's Standard Ukcuy 

/m Sixpemty Volunux, 

Tm Stakoaxd Library is a iww m 
, sad puticdarly the iuie»t works tk 
■otidt eidMr in oompkte works or i 
lh« k«t beaks of the Anslo-SaxcHi 



of vohiflMi coBtatnmg the preat classics of the 
of BBflilh Iteenture. All the great masters will be 
in selections. It is the ambition of thepithUibeis to 
Anglo-^AxcHi race within the reach of every readtf, M lliat_tbe 

Jag •! ths diversity and iplendoor of our English 

ofTkiSTMnuiiDLnsMnrare four (.Soowdkb^s ok Text. a. i 
3. GuusMM or Tyrtk .4* SlMrucmr. TIm Iwoks are well prbted on good ] 
price whldi 
lairy from 
ck>ih gil 

or TreMe Volumes. 

The following books are ready with the exception of those marked with a t, which 
that the book is oearly faady :— 

Thk MKDrTATio?»fl OF Marcus Ai kklius. 

The translation is by R. Graves. 
TKSMovauor JamcAsstxn. In 5 volumes. 

V«. t BwMfdSwriMlity. 
Emn jun> Oooimas aad Xn M«w 
Hr AaMb Bm, Lord 



IdiwttevfcshbtrithoMwykttadMldMry of publishing. EadKifihiin coa- 
n 100 to ase paB«*i Md U«MM ia pa|wr covers. Crown 8vo, at Sincaca aaL or ia 
t at One Shilling ael. IB a nw caaet long books are issued at Doabia Viilaawi 



Sir Thomas Br»Ma» Tha 
ooUatad by A. IL wAk 



Uaw Boaui. 



The Pilcrim's PROGam> 
Ki:flkctions on th« 

By Kdmand BariMi 
Thk Poems Alto 



Thb Amalost 



RuMnoN, NAivaM. 




ToL 1 TiiTiarantaawii 



tea 



Digitized by Google 



GnnAL Utbutuu 



Mbtmobm** Standard Liurar 

fVol. It.— The Rowley Poems. 
tTHK New Like and Sonnets. Ry Dante. 

Translated into English by D. G. KoMetti. 
TomJom's. I!y Henry Fielding. IMMcVM. 
CRANroKD. By Mr^ Gaskell. 
Ti« History ok tmk Dbclink and Fau. ok 
TUB Roman Empirb. By Edwmid Gibbon. 
In 7 double volumes. 
The Text and Notes have been iw^Md by 

LB. Bvy, LituD., but th* Appeadkw of 
■MW» ejcpeoiiwe editka n no< gl ^Mi. 
tTMB TiCAa «r Wtamramm, Bjr Wmx 
Goldnsith. 

Tmr Posm andPlats or Olivbr Golosmitii. 
Thk Works or Ben Jonson. 

Vol. I.— The Case u Alt««d. Every Man 
in His Humeor. Bv«y liaii oat of Hb 

Humour. 

Vol. II. — Cyiifliia' . RcveU; The PoeUuter. 
The text has been collated by H. C. Hart. 
Thk Poems of John Kka rs. Double volume. 
The Text hu been collated by E. de 
Selincourt. 

Oh the Imitation of CiiKi!>T. By Thomas 
k Kempis. 

The tnnidodon it by C. Bigg, DD., 
Canon of ChlfrtClMHdk 
Sbrious Call to a Dbvovt and Holy 
Life. By WUliam Law. 

JtFOBIttOr JOHM MtLTOM. Ib 8 VBioBMR 

vol. 1, rWiflhR liOBt. 

Tm PROSB WORKA OF JOHN MlLTON. 

Vol. l— Eikonoklastes and Tbe Tenure of 
Kinn and Magistrates. 
Select works of Sir Thomas More. 

Vol. t.— Utopia and Poems. 
The Republic of Plato. Translated by 



Double VoloiM. 



A 

Ti 



Sydcnh.irn and Taylor. 

'Vhc lran->Kitlon 

W. H. D. Rouse. 
The Little Flowers of St, 

TraiuUied by W. Heywood. 
Tmk Works or WmuuM Wm/m 

to volumes. 
Vol. l— The Tempestt Xbo Two Gentlemen 

of Verooa : Tbo M«ary Wives of Windsor ; 

MeasoM Ibr IIOHnRt Hm C oa w dy o( 

Erron. 

Vol. 1 1.— Modi Ado Aboot Nothbe ; Love's 
Labour's Lom; A MMwimmer NUu's 
Dream ; Tbe Mcrcbaat of Venice ; AsYon 

Uke It. 

Vol. hi.— The Taming of the Shrew ; AU'b 
Well that Ends Well; TwtUtk ; Tte 

Winter's Tale. 
VoL IV. — The Life and Death of King John; 
The Tragedy of King Richard the Second; 
The Fir-t r.\rt of Kini; Henry nr.| Tb» 

Second Part of King Henry iv. 
Vol. v. — The Life of King Henry v. ; The 
First Part of King Henry vi, ; The Second 
F'art of King Henry VL 
Vol. VI. — The Third Part of King Henry 
VI. ; Tbe Tragedy of King Richard UL ; 
The Famous History of the Life of King 
Henry vin. 

The Poems of.Pbrcv Btsshs Shuut. In 4 
volumes. 

Vol. k— Akiler ; Tha rmoaorfht Worid} 

Hm R««ok or IsluB| otc. 
The Text has been revised by CD. Locock. 
The Life of Nelson. By Robert Soudiqr< 

TirK Natural History and AsTr 
bKLBORNB. By Gilbert White. 



taltooki «C SaobBologjr 

Bfitod bf O. P. GOODCHILD. M.A., &Sc,«ia it MILLQi M.A. 

Fuify Illustrated. 



How to Uakb a Dnss. Hy J. A. E. Wood. 

P^mrtkEdlUiL Cr.Bvc. is. 6a. 
CAXPBirnnr ANDjomBKY. By F. C Wobber. 

Fi/ihSdiiim, CmIm y.ML 
IfnAwwr, TMHNnncAL awo Pkactkau 

ByOasoHBL TUr^XdUim. Cr.av*. 

An iNTRomjcTUN* TO TMS Srvmr or Tn- 
TiLE De-sign. ByAMBBdF.BRHMr. XKnugr 

BtriLDERs' QuANTiTOi. By H* C GnUb. 

Cr. ivo. \t. txi. 
R£pouss£ Metal Wotlb By A. C R«Ai 



Electric Light and Power: An Intro- 
duction to tbe Study of Electrical Engineer- 
ing. By E. E. BnK>ks, B.Sc (L<Mld.X 
Second Alaster and Instnictor of PbyMCft 
and Electrical Eogineering, Leicester 
TochlriGnl School, and W. H. N. James, 
A.R.Ct.. A.I.E.E., Assistant IsHlMiOB 
of deemed Engineering, MaadiMter 
MmkipdTMhRicarScbool. Cr. ivo. 4s. M. 
EwoiMBBRiNO Workshop Practice. By 
C. C. Allen, Lecturer on Engineering, 

Municipal Technical Institute, Coventry. 
^ 



Bdltodbf R. L. OTTLEY, D.D.. Profawor of Pastoral 
and Canon of Chrut Cfavrch, Oxford. 

Tbe series is intended, in part, to furnish the dktgf and 



Theelofjr at Oxfiird, 

oritodBntsoC 



the 



3« 



MB8SK& Mrhubk's Catalogue 



of the questions dealt with ; in part, to make accessible lo the n 
accnnite and concise stalMBMtt Of tett and prlnnipiM ta SB 

Theology and Religion. 

Tm« XXXIX. AuTictesoK tjik Church of 

Enclani>. Edtied by K. C. S. Cfili«on, 

D.D. Fifth ami CktMptr Editicn in out 

fVArffM. Dtmy Btv. 12s. dJ. 
Am Imthoouction to thk Historv op 

Rbugiom. By F. B. Jevooa. II. A., 

Litt.D. Third Edition. Dermyiv0. 101. 6d. 
The Doctkink ok i hk Incarnation. By K. 



public aa 



An Introdoction to n» UisrocT orriui 
Ckkkos. By a. & Bw^ JXD Dmw 
8o». lor. 6d. 

ThS PHTLOAOrMY OF KflUOOIt W BWCHXD 
AND America. By Alfttd GkMHMt.IXIk 

Demy St a. lot. 6d, 

A History op BakltChki&tian Doctkois. 

Bf J. r. 



General Editor. WAI.TER LOCK. D.D.. Warden of Keble College, 
Dean Ireland's Professor of Exegesis in the University of Oxford. 

The object of each conuncntary is primarily cxegetical, to interpret the author s 
meaning to the pr«ent generatioiu The editors will not deal, except verysubor- 
diiMfealy. with qtMstiou of textual criticism or |»hilology ; but, taldng the &iglish 
tost temRemadVlBiiieBM their baMSithOTwill trrto oomUiie • fiearty accept- 

Th« First EnsTtjt op Paol thk ArosTt b 
TO THK Cokinthians, Edited by H. L. 
Goudge, M.A, Demy Srf. 6f. 
The Epistle ur Sr. James. Editad withls- 
troduction and Notes fay X* J« KooaAlb 
D. D. Dtmy 8r>o. 6*. 
The Book op Ezrkiel. Edited H. A. Red- 
path, M. A., D.UtU i7«»iraMw t!Oi,U, 



Tna Book or Genests. Edited with Intro- 
duction and Notes by S. K. Driver, D.D. 
Fij:k l',.i:tioK Dr'ny 8w». ICW. td, 

TuF. Hook of Joii. l-^ited by E. C. S. Gibson, 
D.D. Se^cn-i Edition. Dtmyivo. tt. 

The Acts of thk ArosTLSS. Edited by R. 
B. Rackham, M.A. Dtmf IWb tkird 
EdiHtn» to*. ttU 



Part II. — Fiction 



laXAitthor 

of 'StWpbca RwMra.' BBHOLO THE 
DAYS COME. Cr. Sw. v.U, 
Albanasl (B. Maria). SUSANNAH AND 
ONE OTHER. Fourth Edition, Cr. 
Stv. 6t. 

THE BLUNDER OF AN INNOCENT. 
Second Edition. Cr. 8.-«». 6*. 

C\PRICIOUS CAROLINE, Second Edi- 
tion, Cr. Svo. 6t. 

LOVE AND LOUIS.V. Second Edition, 
Cr. 8tv. 6j. 

PETER. A P.\RASITR. Cr. 8m. 6t. 

THE BROWN EYES OF IIARY. Tkird 
Edition, Cr. 6/. 

I KNOW A MAIDK.N'. Cr. 8w 6s. 

Aaatey (P.). Authoc ofJVice Versa.' A 
BAYARD FROM BSMGAL. Illustrated 
by Bbrnako PABT«m». Third Edititm, 
Cr. Sm. u. fill. 

BMat (RkiiirtfX A ROMAN MTSTBRY. 

THE PASSPORT. Fomrth Ed. Cr. Sew. 6t. 
TEMPTATION. StundEd. Cr.go*, 6r. 
CASTING or MSIB. l^mVmMmtm> Cr. 

8tw. 6(. 



DOmiA INAVA. 

Sew. 6r. 

LOVE'S PROXY. ANenRdithm. 
tt. 

Barlar-OaakKS.). AR.MINELL 

Edition. Cr. ivo. tt. 
URITH. F^tk Edition. Cr.Bv*. 
IN THE ROAR OF THK 

Edition. Cr. tm. 6c. 
CHEAP JACK ZITA. 

Cr. %70. 6s. 
M A K r. ] . R V OF Q V K THXR. 

Edition. Cr. 8t>«. 6t. 
THE gUEENOFLOVB. i^lfifM 

Cr. 8t'o, 6t. 
JACgUETTA. Third Edition. Cr. 
KITrV ALONE. Fifth Mdititm. Cr, 
N0£:ML llhMtiatsd. i 

THE BROOM-SQVIRB. 

Fifth SdUb m, €^ *m 
DARTMOOR mnlA CrIm 
THE PENNTOOMBOVldS 



Cr. 
Cr.Bw. 

. Fifth 
6s. 



Svo. 6t, 
6a 
Cr. 



Edition. Cr. 8m. 6r. 
GUAVAS THE TINNER. 
Stetmd Editi«m. Cr. foA 6c. 



Fiction 



33 



BLADYS or TRB STCWPOMXr. Uhu- 
Umtod. S«e0Hd SdiH0iU Cr.tm. 

PABO THE PRIEST. Cr. 9pc. 6t. 
WINEFRED. Illustrated. Stc^ Edition, 

Cr. 8£'<7. 6s. 
ROYAL GEORGIE. Illustrated. Cr. 8w. 6». 
MISS QUILLET. Illustrated. Cr. Bm 6*. 
CHRIS OF ALL SORTS. Cr. 8r#. 6*. 
IN DEWiSLAinX Stetmd EdiHtm, Cr. 

LITTLE f F" PENNY. . ( AVwJUMMk U. 

S« also Shilling Novels. ' 
Barnett (Edith L), A WILDBUffttS 

NY INNER. Cr. 8tv. 6*. 
B«rr(Jame«). LAUGHING THROUGH 

A WILDERNESS. Cr. Sw, fa. 
Barr (Robert). IN THE MIDST OF 

ALARMS. Third EditUiu Cr,99», 6t. 
THB 8TR(»f O ARM. Sttmd MdUltm. 

THB MUTABLE MANY. TUht MUMm. 

Cr. 9v0. 6$. 

THECOtWTESS TEKLA. Third EtOH^m. 

Cr. Stw. 6*. 
THE LADY ELECTRA. Seccmi Edition. 

Cr. 8tw. fa. 
THE TEMPE.STUOUS PETTICOAT. 

Illustrated. Third Edition. Cr. %vo. 6s. 
See aliw Shilling Novels and S. Crane. 
BMMe (Harold). THE Ai "VENTURES 

OF SIR JOHN SPARROW. Cr.'i-. a. 6i. 
BeHoc(Hllalre). EMM ANUEL BUR 1 )KX, 

MERCHANT. With 36 Uluatntaoos by 

G. K. CHMnanoM. S «em d MdOihm, 

Cr. 8fv. fa. 
BMiaon (E. P.) DOIKX AnrM XdiMM. 

Cr. Ii» it, 
THSCAF8INA. StcmdSdOlm. O.tew. 



aSSnaSm* SUBJECT 

8m 6«. 



VANITI 



MILL. 



TO 
Cr. 



Barton (J. Bloundelle). THE FATE 

OF VALSEC. Cr. Stw. 6/. 
A BRANDED NAME. Cr. 8M. 

See also Shilling Novels. 
Capes (Bernard), Author of 'The Lake of 

Wine." THE EXTRAORDINARY CON- 

PESSI0NS0FDIANAPLBA8B. TUtd 

Edition. Cr. %x>o, (a. 
A JAY OF ITALY. Fourth Ed, Cr.Bcv. 6s. 
L(5AVES and FISHES. Second Edition. 

Cr. 8rv. ts. 
A ROGUE S TRAGEDY. ."Second Edition. 

Cr. 8t'<». 6s. 

Charlton (lUaMHk MAYS. SMoml Edi- 
tion, Cr. 8m. w. 

fhmmr fWaaOatiyX THE tragedy 
OP THE GREAT EMERALD. Cr. 



BUNGALOW. 
6«. 



it. 

THE MYSTERY OF A 

Second Edition. Cr. 8tv. 
.See ftl^ Shilling Novels. 
Carelli (Marie). A ROMANCE OF TWO 
WORLDS. TwtM4r^tv€Mth Edition. Cr. 



VENDETTA. rMMMMIAMto. CK 

THELMA. nft-^NAMAAASebNi Cr.tM. 

ARD.ATH : TflK STORY OF A DEAD 
SELF, ^ei enuenth Edition. Cr. ivo. 6*. 
THE SOUL OF LILITH. Mtmimnth Mdi' 

Hon. Cr. %vo. 6s, 
WORMWOOD. Fi/ttonthEd. Cr.ivo. 6s. 
BARABBAS: A DREAM OF THE 

WORLDS TRAGEDY. 

Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6t. 
THE SORROWS OF SATAM. i>|%^iwf 

Edition. Cr. 8vo. 61. 
THE MASTER CHRI8T1AM. FMB 

Edit ten. Cr. Pr-c. 6s. 
TEMPORAL rOWKR: A STUDY IN 

SUPREMACY. iy>th Thommmd. Cr. 

Bv*. 6t, 

GOD'S GOOD MAN: A SIMPLE Um 
STORY. EtnemikJUmtm, OTlm & 

THE MIGHTY ATOM.. ~ 
tion. Cr. %vo. 6x. 

BOY : a Sketch. Ninth Edition. Cr. ^rc. 6s. 

CAMEOS Twef/th Edition. Cr. Zvo. 6s. 

JANE. A Ntw Edition. Cr.lxo. 6s. 

Cotes (Mrs. Everard). See Sara Jeannette 
Duncan. 

Cottercll (Constance). THE VIRGIN 
AND THE SCALES. IBmilrt. Stttmti 

Edition. Cr. 8t/#. fa. 
Cran4 (Stephen) and Barr (Sllitft)b 

THE O RUDDY. CrStv 6*. 
Crwkett (S. R.). Author of 'The Raiders.' 

etc. LOCH INVAR. IHu trnted. Third 
EdUicn. Cr. 8 i t-, r, . 

THE STANDARD BEARER. Cr, hm. U, 
Croker (B, M.X TRX OLD CAMTOir- 
MENT. Cnlivb 

THE HAPPY^OLBY. JWhT^ 

Cr. Siv. 6*. 

A nim: DAYS* WONDER. 

Ediricn. Cr. 8o#. 6<. 
PEG(;v OF THE BAETOII& Sbttk 

Edition. Cr. %vo. Ar. 
ANGEL. Fourth Edition. Cr. %vo. 6t. 
A ST.\TE SECRET. Third Edition. Cr. 

Bz'o. 6</. 
Crosbie(Mary). DISCIPLES. Cr.Bvo. 6r . 
Dawson (A. DANIEL WBYTI. 

Cr. 8t'<». ys. 6m, ____ ._ 
Deane (MaryX THE OTBBR PAWN. 

(V. 5r<» 6s. 
Doyle (A. Conan), Author of 'Sberlodc 

Holmes' 'The White CompaBy,' alb 

ROUND THE RED UMf, Ml 

Mditim, CV.Sswi 6t. 
Dmmetm ifmem JMaaette) (Mn. EvsEsnl 

Cm«sX~ROBB OBLlOHTPpi. 

AMERICAN& IBttstmicd. TIUntMmmm, 

Cr. ivo. 6t. Sec also Shilllna Novels. 
nadlatar(J. H.). THE GREEN GRAVES 

OF BALGOWROL /K«l MdiUm, 

Cr. 9m>. 6s. 
THE LADDER TO THE STARS. 

Edition. Cr.9vo. 6t. 



34 



Messrs. Metuuen's Catalogue 



(Mary). A NARBOIT WAY. 

Third Edttipn. Cr. Saw.. 6t. 
THE ROSE OrjOV. 

Cr. 8t'*. tS. 

A BLIND BIRD S NEST. • IDw- 

trations. Cr. Br*. 6x. 
See al*o Shilling Novel*, 
ntzpatrick (K.) TUS WXANS AT 
KoWALLAlf. niwiwiiii SmmiM^i' 

ti0M. Cr. ftr. 

RUatMbea (OaralA. MOBB KIK 
THAli KIND. OvW «ib 

PnuMta (M. B.V SRFnifO WEST- 
WARD. Tr. 8tw. 6x. 

Pfe«Mr(Mrs. Harh), Author of' The Stoten 
Emperor.' THV. SLAKIMO OT TUK 

SWORD. Cr. 8t(». 6*. 
IN THE SHADOW OF THE LOU). 
Stctmd KditioH. Crmtm 3t>o. 6*. 

r-Mattland (EIU). Author of ' Th« 

ffii«nor). Author of 'The Biojjraphy 
Iric Girl.' THE PLOW-WOMAN. 

Cr. 8ft». 6/. 

(I*rard (Dorotbea), Author of ' lady Bftby.' 

THE CONQUEST OF LOHDOK. 

Stemnd Edititm. Cr,9m> U» 
HOLY MATRlHOmr. Stm 

Cr. i; o. 6t. 

MADE OF MONEY Cr. 8m. 6*. 
THE BRIDGE OF LIFS. Cr,9m, Cc 
THE IMPROBABUB UjfVU 

Mmmu Cr. 8ml 6ft 
8Malw8lulUngNo«dk 
QiMtef (OwillL Anther of 'Demos' 'In 

theYaw orTiiSaM,' etc. THE TOWN 

TRAVELLER- Second Ed. Cr. 8tv. 6*. 
THE CROWN OF LIKE. Cr. gxw. tt. 
(ilei? (Charles). HUNTER'S €IIU1SB. 

Illuf.lrated. t>. Stv. 3*. <>d. 
Hamilton (M.), Author of 'Cut Laurels.' 

THE FIRST CLAIM. Cr. 8rv.. 6#. 
Harraden ( Beatrice). IN VARYING 

MOODS. Fourtttntk Edition. Cr.Btv. 6x. 
HILDA STRAFFORD and THE REMIT- 

TANCE MAN. rwt{/ik EdiU<m. Cr. 

Srv. ts, 

THE SCHOLAR S DAUGHTER. Fourth 

Editicn, Cr. Sm 6/. 

Harr«d(P.)(PraMwPMjbw RaMaM). 
THE TAIUNO OF TUBKOTB. C^. 
W. 6c. 

DEIn. Cr. 8m. 
Wch— (RefcartX TUB PSOPHET OF 
BERKELEY 8QUA1LB. 
Cr. 8m. 6«. 



TONGUES OF C0NSC1BNC& 

Edition. Cr. Sr-c. 6x. 
FELIX. Fifth Edition. Cr. 8ro. 6*. 
THE WOMAN WITH THE FAN. Sijsth 

Edition. Cr. Sro. 6r. 
BVRWAYS. Cr. 8r<». 6». 
THE GARDEN OK ALLAB. ^/UmOk 

SMtuH. Cr. 8tw. 6«. 
THE BLACK SPANIBL. OnlM. 0fc 



THE CALL OF THE 

Edition. Cr. 8r<'. 6*. 
Hobbe* (John Oliver), Author of ' Robert 

Orange.' THE SKRIOUS WOOING. 

Cr. %T>o. es. 
Hope (Anthony). THE GOD IN THK 

CAR. Vent A Edition. Cr. 8rw. 6*. 
A CHANGE OF AIR. SixtJk Edition. 

Cr. Svo. 6s. 
A MAN OF MARK. Fi/th Ed, Cr. 8m. 6s. 
THE CHRONICLES OF COUNT AN- 

TONia SM EMHm. Cr,%m. U> 

nntosol nNwiiiiiJ g. b. 

SIMON DALB. 

Cr. Bmi 6*. 
THE KING'S MIRROR. Ftmrtk 

Cr. ivo. 6s. 

?UISANTE. FourtA Edition. Cr. 8m. 6r. 
HE DOLLY DIALO(;ULS Cr. Bvo. ts. 
A SERVANT OF THE PL T.LIC Illu.- 

traced. FourtA Edit ron. C'. ts. 
Hope (Oraham), Author of ' A Uirdinal au(". 
his Con^icnce,' etc., etc THE L.\DY 
OF LVTF„ Secomd Edition. C". Ivo. (a. 
Housrh (Emerson). THK MISSISSIPPI 

HUBBLE. Illustratetl. Cr. Brv. ts. 
Housman (Clemence). THE LIFE OF 
SIR AGLOVALE DF. GALIS. Cr. 8ry.. 6*. 
Hyna (C. J. Ciitciif fe). 
Keltic.' MR. HOI 
Third Edition. C> . fcrj. fj. 
PRINCE RUPERT, THE BUCCANEER, 
lllostrated. Cr. Sm. 6<:. 

(W. W.X MANT CAROOBS. 

SEA UftCHINS. JUin£ O 

A MASTER OF CRAFT llluUnaeA 
Stvenih Edition. Cr. grw. ««. 6d. 



le), .Vuthor of ' Caplaia 
•RROe K.S PURSER. 



Illuurated. 
6tL 



LIGHT FREIGHTS. Hit 

Edition. Cr. 8rv. 3X. 6d. 
THE SKIPPER'S WOOlMOk 

tion. Cr. 8tv». v. 6d. 
DIALSTONE LANE. IIJ 

Edition. Cr. Bz'o. ^s. 6tl» 
ODD CRAFT. IllustratedL 

tion. Cr. 8m. xt. 6d. 
AT SUNWICH PORT. 

Seventh Edititm. Cr. 
James (Hanr^). THE SOFT i 

Edition. Cr. 8m. 6s. 
THE BETTER SORT. Cr. Sm. 
THE AMBASSADORS. 

Cr. Sm. 6fc 
THE GOLDEN BOWL. 

Cr. 8m. €tt 
Keays (H. A. WUU^im. HE THAT 

EATETH BREAD WITH ME. Cr. 

8rf. (•■; 

Kester (Vaughan). THE FORTUNES 
OK THE LANDRAVS. Cr. &nK 6s. 

Lawless (Him. Emlty). WITH ESSEX 
IN IRELAND. Cr. Sro. 6ft 
See abo ShillinK NoveU. 

LeQaMix(W.). THE HUNCHB.\CK OF 
WESTMINSTER. TAM JSdMm, Cr. 



Ficnov 



as 



THP: closed book. rAirJ Edition. 

Cr. 8tw. 6«. 
TUB VALLBY OP THB SHADOW. 

niMtralad. TkMSitHm, Cin lMk #«. 
BEHIND THSTHROMB. TMrdMm$m, 

CSr. fcw. 6«. 
iMtt-Yeats iS.\ OBKAHT. tearf 

Ration. Cr. 8w. (S». 
i4mdon (Jack), Amh»r of 'The Call nf (he 

Wild.' 'The Sea Wolf.' etc WHITE 

l ANti. .Stcotui Edition. Cr. 60c. tt. 
Lucas (e.V.> LfSTE NEK'S LURE: An 

Oblique Narration. Crwmm tWk Mtmrtk 

Edition. Cr. %va. 6t. 
Lyall (Edna). DERRICK VAUGHAN, 

NOVELIST. 4aW TtunuamJ, Cr. ito. 

V. f>'i- 

M'Carthy (Justin H.), Author of If I were 
King.' THE LADY OF LOYALTY 
HOUSE. lUustimtcd. Third EdititH. Cr. 

8rv. ts. 

THE DRYAD. StttmdBdiUmt, CntM U. 
MMiMMld (RmmMV TBBSBAMAID. 

SmmdEAkm, , Cr. »gi. ««» 
A ROMAH TBimrr. 
MMHa|MM(8.> THE FORTUNE OF 

CBKISTmA MACNAB. Third Edition. 

Cn tvc. 6s. 
MaktCLocM). COLONEL ENDERBY S 

Wll K. Fourth Edition. Cr. %T'0. ts. 

A COUNSEL OF PERFECTION New 

Edition, Cr. 8p«. 6*. 
THE WAGES OF SIN. Fifteenth Edition. 

Cr. 8t'o. 6x. 
THE CARISSIMA, E.^urth Edition. Cr. 

Zvo. hs. 

THE GATELESS BARRIER. Fourth Edi. 

tion. Cr. Srvj. 6*. 
THE HISTORY OF SIR RICHARD 

CALMADY. Stvonth Edition. Cr.Bvo. 6t. 
Sm iiUo Boolu for Boya sDd GiHfc 
M«n(MrB. M. B.X OLlVU'SSUlOIBIL 

SteondJUMtm. O.tM. 
A LOST B8TATB. A Mim MOHm. 

THB PARISH OP HILBY. AJtkmMdititm, 

Cr. Sva. 6t. 
THE PARISH NURSE. FomHk BdiUmu 

Cr. ivo. 6j. 
GRAN'MA'S JANE. Cr. Bvo. 6s. 
MRS. PK I KK HOWARD. Cr. Svo. 6s. 
A WINTER S TALE. A New Edition. 

Cr. 8r'.». r.i. 
ONE ANOTHER'S BURDENS. A Neiv 

Edition. Cr. F.r .i. 61. 
ROSE AT HONK VrOT. Third Ed. Cr. 

Szro. 6s. Sep iiKi) ]l >oks for I'.uys and Girls. 
THE MEMORIES OF RONALD LOVE. 

Cr. 8ro. ts. 
THE EG LA MORE PORTRAITS. Third 

Edition. Cr. 8to. 6s. 

t&kSA^ IHB TW IUU PIHAM 

^ RBkAGB. Steond Edition. Cr.tvo. 6t. 
MARQUIS OF PUTMBY. Stt^md 



LOW. TUht 



A DUBL . Cr 8m. d(. 
IN THB 8BRVICE OP 

JUUtm, Cr,9m. 6a. 
8m aiw SUIHmc Novdti 
mmm (A. B. WTL Anibor of *T1m Poor 

WmAms: etc. CLEMENTINA, not- 

CnUMd. .'itcond Edition. Cr.Bvo. 6t. 
MallMn (Helen), Author of ' Comin' Uuo' 

Am Rye. HOVBY. iM* Attter. 

Cr. Im. 6*. 

GRlFPOPOEIPriTBSOODRT. Cnlwb 

6*. 

THE FERRYMAN. S^etrnTMUkm, 0% 

Sro. 61. 

T A I . L \' • H O ! /umr/k Edition. Cr. 8rv». 6s. 
Mmxwell (W. B.). AaUwc of 'The Ragged 

Messcnser.' YIVIBN. M^m MdiUm, 

Cr. Bfo. 6t. 
THE RAGGED MESSBMOBR. TUnt 

Edition, Cr. Bvo. 6s. 
FABULOUS FANCIES. Cr. Sro. 6t. 
THE GUARDED FLAME. Smnth Edi- 

t^m. Cr, 8tM. 6if . 
THB COUMTBSS OP IIAYBURY. A 

t^MNfym. CKlfW. te, 
ODD LENGTHS. Cr. 9m. fir. 
Meade (UT.X DRIFT. 

Cr. St o. 6s. 
RESURGAM. Cr. ivo. 6t. 
VICTORY. Cr. &V0. 6s. 

See a'so Books for Boy* and GirU. 
Melton (R.). CiflSAR'S 

Edition. Cr. Btv. 6s. 
Meredith (EUU). HBABT OP MY 

HEART. Cr. 8ml it. 
Miller (BBUm^ UYINO UBS. CK 

Btv. 6t. 

•MUe Molly* (The Author of). THE 
GREAT RECONCILER. Cr. Bvo. 6s. 

Mitford (Bertram). THE SK;N OF THE 
SPIDER. Illustrated. Sixth Edition. 

IN TUB ^HIRL OF THB B18Uf& 

Third Sditim. Cr. 8e«w ife 
THB RED DEBBUCT. Simd MMbm, 

Cr.tm. 6r. 
Montresor (P. P.), Author of 'Into the 

Highways .nul Hedges.' THE ALIEN. 

y Y Cr.lvo. 6s. 
Morrison (Arthur). TALES OF MEAN 
STREETS. .Sr;f nth Edition. Cr.&vf. 6s. 
A CHILD OF THE JAGO Fi/?h Edition. 

TO LONDON TOWN. Second Edition. 

Cr. 6s. 

CUNNING MURRKLL. Cr.SMi 6* 
THE HOLE IN THE WALL. 

tion, Cr. 8t'<». 6^. 
DIVERS VANITIES. Cr. 81W. 
Nesbit (B.). (Mrs. 

HOUSE. 

Cr. tM. tt. 
SmAo ShUUog NoMfab 

HABltYiUmVBStJLA. CvTIm. iv. 
Onivaat (AlfradV OWD BOB. THE 
GREY DOG OP KENMUIR. IfimtM 



36 



Mbthiibii's Catalogub 



Oppenheim (E. PhllUiM). MASTER OF 
MtN. Fcurth Editwm. Cr.Bvo. 6x. 

Oxciiliam (John), Author of 'Bariit of 

Grand Bayou. ' A WE AVE R Of MTBBS. 

Second Edition. Cr. 8m^ 6t, 
THE GATS OF THE DBSXltT. Pimtrtk 

F dhim . Cr. 6a, 
PROFIT AHD L088. Witt « Awitispiece 

in pbotogravatv \j Raxold Corrare. 

Ptmrtk Editiom. Cr. 8ml 6r. 
THE LONG ROAD. With a FrontUpiece 

by Harold Copping. Cr. tt. 
PttlB (Barry). LINDLBY KAYSL Third 

Edition. Cr. 8r«. 6*. 
Parker (Ollbort). PIERRE AND HIS 

PkOPLE. SiJTtA Edition. Cr. Sew. 6s. 
MRS. FALCaiON. FV^JUMtn, Cr.^. 

6s. 

J HK TR.\NSL.\TION OF A SAFAGE. 

J'kirJ Edition. Cr. 8ro. 6*. 
THE TRAIL OF THE SWORD. lUus- 

trated. Ninth Edition. Cr. 8rv. 6x. 
WHEN VALMOND CAME TO PONTIAC : 

The Story of a Lost Napoleon. Fijik 

Edition. Cr. ivo. 6s. 
AN ADVKN TURKR O F T gS W ORTH. 

Tha XjhI AdfiUiBRS 'nvAlir Fteca.* 

Third Edition. Cr.tv*. 6t, 
THE SEATS OF THE MIGHTY, irhn- 

tr.-ited. Fcttt tetnfh Edition, Cr. 8rv». 6*. 
THE BATTLE OF THE STRONG: a 

Roni.ince of Two Kingdoms. M lMU ' la d. 

fi/th Edition. Cr. Br .'. 6s. 
THE POMP OF THE LAVILETTW. 

Second Edition. Cr. 8m y. 6d. 

Pembcrton (.Max). THE FOOTSTEPS 
OK A THRONE. lUuslralcd. Third 

l-.diticH. Cr. St t'. 6s. 

I CKOWN THEE KlNa Walk illiwtn^ 
lioDS by Frank Dadd and A. ForrMNcr. 

Cr. St . 

Phlllpotts ^lidcn). LYING PROPHETS. 

'Third Edition. Cr. Zz-o. 6s. 
CHILDREN OE THE MIST Fi/th I d: 

tioH. Cr. Zfo. fss. 
THE HUMAN BOY. With a Frontispiece. 

Fousrik Edition Cr. St^o. 6f. 
SONS OF THE MORNING. Second 

Kditien. Cr. Bvtf. 6*. 
THE RIVER. Third EdiUmu Cr,%v», 6t. 
THE AMERICAN PRlSOHXiL AwM 

Edition. Cr. 8Mk 6t. 
THE SECR8T WOMAN. g^mmEMHmu 

KNOCKATAVSNTURB. WittaltaMk- 
TihdMMtUm, Cf^lm ft. 
IBPORTRBEVB. FmnhMdUm, Cr. 

TRB POACHER'S WIFE. Timiir ^imm 
Cr. Btw. 6s. 

See also Shilling Novels. 

Pkkthall (.Marmaduke). SaTd THE 
FISHERMAN. Fifth Edition, Cr. 9m. 
6s. 

BRENDLR. Second EdiUm. Cr.%99. 6t, 
THE HOUSE OF I8LA1L Tf 
CnSaw. 



*Q,* Author of ' Dead Man s Rock. 
WHI 



THE 

TE WOLF. Smmd Mmm, Cr. 

6tv. 6f. 
THE MAYOR OF ZKOY. 

Cr. ^po. 6s. ^ ' 

MERRY GARDEN AND OTHER 

STORIES. Cr. Zvo. 6s. 
RawaoB (Maud 9tepniay), Author of 'A 

Lady of the Recency.' *Tti« La boww> 

Comedy,' etc. THE BNCSANTBD 

GARDEN. Cr. ivo. 6u 
Rhya (QrMa). THE WOOIVG OF 

SHEILA. SoemdJS^iHm 0^%m, 3^ 
Ridffa (W. P«tt>. LOST FROiBRTV. 

SoetmdEditiom. Cr.tt*. 61. 
RRB. Socond Edition, Cir.lnik 
A SON OF TH E STATE. " 

Cr. Bz'o. 3^. 6d. 
A BREAKER OF LAWa A 

Cr. Bvo. ^f. fid. 
MRS. GALl.K S BUSINESS. II 

Second Edition. Cr. 9mo. 6s. 
SECRETARY TO BAlNli^M.F. CSntMk 

3J. 6d. 

THE WICKHAMSBiL f^mtk AMm. 

Cr. fcv. 6s. 
Roberts (C. 0. D.). THE HEART OF 

THE ANCIENT WOOD. Cr.ivo. y.6d. 
Rnaaell (W. Clark). MY DANISH 

SWEETHEART. Illuatraied. F^/ih 

Edition. Cr. %vo. 6s. 
HIS ISLAND PRINCESS. Ukntiated. 

Steomd EdiHom. Cr.tiaww 6k. 
ABANDONED. 5^c»W.fiMtfMbCr. IM. 6s. 

Sea also Book* for BoyaaaAOkk. 
Servant (AdallM). BARBARA'S 

MONEY. Cr.8M. te. 
THE PROGRESS OF RACHABL. Cn 

B7-0. 6s. 

THK MYSTERY OF THE MOAT. Smmi 

Edition. Cr. Stw. 6«. _ 

THE COMING OF TUB RANDOLFH& 

Cr. Srv. 6s. 

Sec .ilso shilling Novels. 
Shannon. (W.F.) THE MESS DECK. 

Cr. %VO. %l'6d. 
See alv> ShtlHng Novels, 

Shelley (B«rtba). EN DERBY. Cr. 8tv». 6s. 

5idirwick (Mr*. Alfred). Author of 'Cyn- 
tlua*« Way.* TH E K I N S M A N . With 8 
lUattiatMNU ky C fi. B kock . Second Ed. 
Cr,9m, 6$, 

8«nlclWM(AAtrt). DEEP-SEA VAGA- 
BONDS* Cf. fiik 

Sunhmrw (qaerga). THK HA'FBNNY 
MILLKWAIRE. CIrwtMk 

TkomiMon (Vaace). SFINIOCRS OF 
LIFE. Cr. Bvo. 6s. 

Urquhart (M.), A TKAilEDY IN COM- 
MONPLACE. Second Ed. Cp. Sfw. 6c 

Waineman (Paul). THE SONO OF THB 
FOREST. Cr.Scw. 6s. 

A HEROINS FROM FlMLANDw Cr. 
%t'0. 6s. 

See also Shillint: No\ ek. 
WalUfB. C). THE ANCIENT LAND- 
MARKt A Ffliirif Fi— w Cnlwi 
6»» 



FicnoH 



37 



Watjon (H. B. Marriott% ALARUMS 

AND EXCURSIONS, Cr. Zvc. 6s. 
CAPTAIN FORTUNE. T/ura Eaiiicn. 

Cr. 8tv. 6x. 
TWISTED EGLANTINE. Wtlh S Ith». 

trationsbrnuMSCBAIO. TthtdSdUkm. 

Cr. 8ctf. 6«. 
THE HIGH TOBY. Wift a Wmakphe*, 

A MIDSVMlfBIt Vkn BIOEAM. 

See alM ShUOni Novdt. 

(H. qITtHB SBA LADV. Cr. 
8tv. ts. 

Weynuin (Stanley), Auihorof A Gentleman 
of France.' I NDER THE RED ROUE. 
With Illustrations by R. C. WoOOVIUJL 
Tuemtietk Edition. Cr. Bvo. 6t. 

White (Stewart EA Author of ' The Biased 
TraU.^ CONJURORS HOUSE. A 
Romance of the FimTmII SgMMTJiiMbH. 
Cr. tvc. 6t. 

White (Pmvy). THE SYSTEM. 7%itd 
Edition. C>. Sm. 6t. 

THE PATIENT MAN. Smad Mdhhm. 
Cr.tvo. te. 

WUliaaa OteftiyX THB BAB. Cr. 
■Mb te. 



WllllamMn (Mre. C N.), Author of ' The 
BarnstoTTOers," THE ADVENTURE 
OF PRINCESS SYLVIA. Stcond Edi- 
tion. Cr. %vo. 6s. 

THE WOMAN WHQPARSD. Cr. ftr. 

THE SEA COULD JkwM# J'^Wi. 
Cr. iMk 

THS CASTtB or THB SHADOWS. 
THrdEdMm, Cr,9m 

PAPA. Cr. IM. 6f: 

WmfaMMOB (C N. and A. M.). THE 

LIGHTNING CONDUCTOR : Beiac the 



Romance ol a Motor Car. Ilh 
Pi/tttnth Editicn. Cr. %vo. 6*. 
THE PKINCKSS PASSES. 

Seztnth Edition. Cr. Zx-o. 6s. 
MY FRIEND THE CH AUFFEUR. With 
1 6 Illustratton&i Eighth Edition. Cr. 
Zvo. 6s. 

THE CAR OF DESTINY AND ITS 
ERRAND nr SFAIK. JMEmkm. 

Iliustrated. 

LADY BETTY ACROSS THE WATER. 

Sixth Edition. Cr. Ivo. 6s. 
WylUrde (DoU), Author of ' UriAh tLe 

Hittite.' THE PATHWAY OF THE 

PIONEER afoot - - 

^fid^B^^^^^M^^ ^^3^^ ^tl^fl^ ^^^^^ 



ef 'MI«a nUBr*' TBBORBAT 

RECONCILER. 

TO ARMS. 

B«ring-Qould (S.X MRS. CURCENVEN 
OF":URGRNTiN. 

DOMITIA. 
I HE FkOBISHERS. 
CHRIS OF ALL SORTS. 
DARTMOOR IDYLLS. 

WEST 

A CREEL OF IRISH STORIES. 
THB FOUNDING OF FORTUNES. 
THE LAND OF THB SHAMROCK. 

Barr (Robert). THE VICTORS. 
Bartram (QeorfeX THIRTEEN EVEN- 

INC.S. 

BeneoD (E. F.), Author of 'Dodo.' THE 

CAPS! N A. 
Bowles (Q. Stewart). A STRETCH OFF 

THE LAND. 
Brooke (Bmma). THE POETS CHILD. 
Bullock (Shan F.). THE BABRYS. 
THE CHARMER, 
THE SQUIREEN. 
THE RED LEAGUERS. 
Bvtoa (J. BleanMMX AOtOSSTRE 

SALT SEAS. 
THE CLASH OF A1M& 
DENOUNCED. 
FORTUNE S MV FOE. 
A BBAMDED NAME. 



Capes 

FIR 



AT A 

IRE. 

ChMogr (W«irtfewljV THB BAPTIST 

THE BRANDED PRINCE. 
THE FOUNDERED GALLEON. 
JOHN TOPI' 

THE MYSTERY OF A BUNGALOW. 

CUHord(Mr8. W, K.). A FLA.SH OK 
SUMMER. 

Cobb. Thomas. A CHA NGE OF FACE. 
Collinrwood (Harrjr). THB DOOCOR 

OF THE 'jyUEX * _ 

I Comf ord OU GtM^ SOITODF ADVBR- 

I SITV. 

CotUrell (ConstanoftV THE TISGIN 

AND THE SCALES. 
Crane (Stephen). WOUNDS IN THE 
RAIN. 

Denny (C. E.). THE ROMANCE OF 

UPFOLD M.VNOR. 
Dickson ( Harrif ). THE BLACK WOLF S 

BRFKl). 

Dlckin»on (Evelyn). THE SIN OF 

ANGELS. 

■Duncan (Sara J.). THE POOL IN THE 
DESERT. 

A VOYAGE OF CONSOLATION Illu«- 
trated. 

Bmbree (C. F.). A HEART OF FLAM E. 

Illustrated. 

Peoa 03. Manvllta^ Atf BLECXRIC 

SPARK. 
A DO VBLB KMOi; 



3» 



Messrs. Methukn's Catalcx*U£ 



OVBR THB HILLS. 
MORS KIV THAN 



(Jute tL). A DAUGBTIK OF 
STRIFE. 

flndlater (Mary). 
lUstcpiMB (0.>. 

KIND. 

PMcber (J. S.). •pWin MARCH. 

LUCAN I Hfc DRItAMKR. 

Forrest (R. B.)k THB SWORD OF 

AZKAFI„ 
Francis ( M. E.). ^riSS ERIN. 
QalJon(Tom). RICKERBY'S FOLLY. 
Ocrard (l^orothea). THINGS THAT 

HAVE HAPPENED. 
THE CONQUEST OF LONDOir. 
THE SUPREME CRIME. 
ailchrist(R. Murray). WILLOWBRAKE 
aianvllle (Ernest). THE DESPATCH 

KIUER. 
THE LOST REGIMENT. 
THE KLOOK BRIDE. 
TUK INCA'S TR£ASUR£i 
Ow«M(Jall«|). MR& GLTDB. 

WORLD S PSOPLB. 

OMt (C. p.). THX RKDRMPTIOH OP 

DAVID CORSON. 
Qrm^(^. M'QaMn). MY STEWARD- 

Hales (A. a.). TAIR THE APOSTATK. 
Hamilton (UK BWltO. MARY HAMIL- 
TON. 

Harrison (Mrs. Burton). A PRIIIGI8S 

OF THE HILLS. IlluMr.^tcd. 
Hooper (1.). THE SINGER OF MARLY, 
ttonrh (Emerson). THE .MISSISSIPPI 

BUBBLE. 

•loU' (Mrs. Caffyn). ANNE MAULE- 
VERER. 

Jepson (Bdnr). THE KEEPERS OF 

THE PEOPLE. 
KMiry (C. P.). THE JO URNAL IST. 
KaUy lNor«M»PM». WITH HOOFS 

OF S 



TEEU 

Lant^brldge (V.) and Bourne (C. H.). 

THE VALLEY OK INHERITANCE. 
Lawless (Hon. Baally). MAELCHO. 
I lailfin (Annin) A WOMAN OF SENTI. 
IfENT. 

JOSIAH^WIFR. 
.). THE AirniCRATS. 
(Amm). THB St&Kt OF 



, _ THE FDPFBT 

TOWN. 

Hackle (Pauline Bradford THB VOICE 

IN THE DESERT. 
Blarsh (Richard). THB SEEN AHD 

THE UNSEEN. 
GARNERED. 
A METAMORPHOSIS. 
MARVELS AND MYSTERIES. 
BOTH SIDES OF THE VEIL. 

MayalKJ. W.V THBCnriCAMBTHB 

^REN. 

Meade (L. T.). RBSUROAM. 

Monkhousc (Allan). LOVE IN A LIFF« 
JM^^^j^wi. THE KNIGHT PUNC- 



ARY SENSE. 
NwTtafW. B.). ANOCTAVB. 
MATTHEW AUSTIN. 
THE DESPOTIC LADY. 
OUptaant (Mrs.). THE LAD\'^ 
SIR ROBERT'S FORTUNE. 
THE TWO MARYS. 
Rendered (M.J.). AN ENGLISHMAN. 
Penny ( 

AGE. 



Phillpotts 

HOURS. 
FANCY FREE. 
Pryce (Richard). 

WOMAN. 
Ran dall (J^lm). 

BUTTON 



(WiM) THB 



A MIXKD MARp 

STRimra 



TIME AND THE 
AUNT BETHIA'S 



(irdHH}. FORxmnrssiAR- 



Rayacr(011va Pratt). ROSALBA. 
Rhys (Grace). THE DIVERTED VIL. 

LAGE. 

Rlckert (Edith). OUT OF THE CVPRF-SS 
SWAMP. 

Rebartno(M.H.). AC ALLAN TQUAK£R. 
<W. OMtOb ABAMDOlfBD. 

[niMiiiHi rosbAcrar. 

LITTE. 

Serjeant <AMfaM)b AOCOSBD AND 

ACCUSER, 
r VRP.ARA'S MONEY. 
THE ENTHUSIAST. 
A GREAT LADY. 
THE IX) VE THAT OVERCAME. 
THE MASTER OF BEBCHWOOIX 
UNDER SUSPICION. 
THE YELLOW DIA.MOND. 
THB MYSTBRY OF THE MOAT: 
THB FROGRBSS OF RACHABL. 
Shannon (W. P.). JIM TWELVES. 
Stephens (R. N.). AN ENEMY OF THE 

KING. 

Strain (B. H.). ELMSLIE'SDRAG NET. 
Strinffer (Arthur). THB SILVER POPPY. 
Staart(E9infe). CHRISTALIA. 

A WOMAN OF FORTY. 

Sutherland (Duchesf aQb 0MB HOUR 

AND THE NEXT. 
8iraa(AMl4. LOVE GROWN OOUX. 

SwIltCMnM SORDON. 

SIREN CITY. 

Taaqaeray(M.B.II.K TBB ROYAL 

QUAKER. 

Tho«|Ma(VSM«i|. 8FINNBR8 OF 

Trafford-TaMilB|||l9.B*W.)i 8ILBNT 

DOMINION. 
Upward (Allen). ATI! FLSTANB FORD. 

Waineman(Paul). A HEROINB FROM 

FINLAND. 
BY A FINNISH IJ^KE. 
Watson (H. B. Marriott). 
OF HAPPY CHAMCB. 
' TALBSOFDUMBK 



Digitized by Google 



f 



Fiction 



39 



Tmb GrrrfMC, Weul of Dokothv. 

W. K. CltfTord. Second hdititm. 
Only k GuAao4toMI DM By 

Cuthell. 



IbfUn. 



or 



Tmb Doctor 

Collinffwood. 
LlTTUB PBIMIfc 
F.dithn. 

MasTKN RoCKArKIXAK s VoVAflK, 

Clark RuuelL Third hattt^n. 
Thk Skcrkt of Mapam" i>k 
tlM Autksv Of " Mdlk. Mori. 



Books for Boys aud GirLi 
9^ 3&M 

SvD Bklton : Or, the Boywko 

to Sea. by G- Man\ ille Fenn. 
Thk Rkd Gkano!-. I y Mf - ^'' 

A GlUL OF TMK PEOI LK. By 1. 

Second Edition. 
Hefsy Gii sY. By L. T. Meade. 
Thb Honourablk Mm* By I* 

Stcond Hditiam. 
Thf.rb a 

Mann. 
Wmkn 



By w. 



enworth. 
T. Meade. 

T. 




0»C«ffTAIV PaMMOA 



Act*. 

Thk Ad 
Amal'ky. 

Thb Bird or Fatr 
The Black Tuur. 
Tmk Castle or 
Catherine Blum. 

C EC ILK. 

The Chkvauu D'Uabmsntal. 

roluma. 
conscibncb 
Thb Convict's Son. 
The Corsican BEOTims i mkL Otha 

Archbe. 
Crof'Baud Jacqoot. 
Thb ~ '* 
Fi 
G, 



Tht Hovels of Alezaadx* ! 

A^fcV <yL DoubU Volumet, if. 

L<<1'1SE D« LA 



THK 




Qbceb Mbvcoc 



of Qoecn Marg>t. 



Biiag ths Moood part 



Tub ijunr or momiobbao. 



LiiRK. B«taK tlM irtf 



?ari of Thk Vicoi 
)oub!e Volume. 
MaItrk Aoam. 

The Man in thb Iron Mask. 

the second part of The V 

Bkahfi nsNK. Double 
The Mourn or Hki.l. 
Nasun. Double voluBMa 
Paui.ink; Pascal BmmOS 
F^RR La RuiNE. 
Tub Pkince of Tntbybe. 
Thb RbobmtIi DaVOMTSB. 
Thb Rbmi 
Robim Uom». 
Thb Smwmi 

SYLVAKDIBBi 

Talbs or THB SwL 

Aaditv I«Bf. 



Being 




TWbntt Tkabb ArrsB. 

The Wild Duck 
Tub Wolt^Lbaobb. 



DaaUt 



Methnen's Sixpenny Books 



AIbB— I (B.JB^X 



LOVBAND LOUISA. 
AMD 



JUDICE. 

Bagot (Rkhard). A ROMAN MYSTERY. 
BaFfour (AadrvwX BY STROKE OF 

Barlas-Ooald (S^ FUIZB BLCX)Jii. 
CHEAP JACJv ZiTA. 
KITTY AlJONE. 
URITH. 

THB BROOM 80UIRB. 

IN THB ROAROF THB 8BA. 

NOEMI. 

A BOOK OF FAIRY TALBS. UliMtnMii. 

LITTLF. tu penny. 
THK FROBISHERS. 

W I N F F R F. D 

Barr ' (Roixjrt). JK.NNIE BAXTER, 

JOURNALIST. 
IN THE MIDST OF ALARMS. 



■BAKT OP 



OP 



THE MUTABLE MANY. 
Benson (E. F.). DODO. 
Broot4(Cluwl«ltoi, SHIRLBY. 
BrtfwiMll (CTXX THB 

JAPAN. 
Bartoa (J. BlowMMM* 

SALT SEAS. 

CBfffBrtf mn, W. tU\ A FLASH Of 

SUMMER. 
MRS. KEITH'S CRIME. 
Cwmell (P. NBtmpUb TIB HIOQBK 

KNIGHTS. 
Corbett (Julian). A ■ VMFPW IM 

GREAT WAIKRS. 
Croker (Mrs. B. WL). WSKSt 09 THB 

BARTONS. 
AtlATBSBCBXr. 



Digitized by Google 



40 



MsTBum Catauxkjb 



ANGET^ 
JOHANNA. 

Dant« (AllfllilMi). THE VISION OF 

DANTE (CaryX 
Dovto (A. Coaan). ROUND THE RED 

LAMP. 

Doocan (Sara Jeannettc). A VOYAGE 

OF CONSOLATION 
THOSE DEUGHTFUL AUKRICAN& 
BUot {Qwtti* IHIMILL Olf THX 

FLOSS. 

Pladlator (J«IM HA THE OUBN 

GRAVES OF BALGOWRIB. 
OallMtToM). RICKERBY-S lOLLT. 

aMtoii(Mr«.x dujirom 

MARY BARTON. 

NORTH AND SOUTH. 
Qerard (Dorothea). HOLY MATRI- 
MONY. 

THE CONQUEST OF LONDON. 
MADE OF MONKY. 

<Jli«In»(aeor»e). THE TOWN TRAVEL- 

LKk. 

TIIL CROWN OF LIFE. 

Qlanvllle (ErattA THB IWCA S 

TRKASCRE. 
THE KLOOF BRIDE. 
aieig (Charlei). BUNTF R S CRUISE, 
arlmm (The Brothers). ORIMll'S 

FAIRY TALEii. UlustnMd. 
HoM (Anthoqv). A MAN OT ItAUL 
A CHANGE OF AIR. 
THK CHRONICLB8 OP COUNT 

ANTONIO. 
PHROSO. 

THE DOLLY DIALOOUBB. 

ItonuuMr (B. W.X DBAD XBN TILL 

NO nLLBS. 
InrrakMB (J. H.X THB THXONB OP 

DAVID. 

LeQneux(W.>. THE HUNCHBACK OF 

WESTMINSTER. 
Levett-Veats iS. K.). THE TRAITOR S 

WAN'. 

ILlnton (tZ. Lynn). THE TRUE HIS- 
TORY OF JOSHUA DAVIDSON. 
LvalKEdna). DERRICK VAT'(,HAN. 
Malet(Lucas). THK CARISSI M.V. 
A COUNSEL OF PERFECTION. 
Mann (Mr*. M. B.), MRS. PETER 

HOWARD. 
A LOST ESTATE. 
THE CEDAR STAR. 
ONE ANOTHER S RURDENS. 
Marchmont (A. W.). MISER UOAD- 

LEY S sec: RET. 
A MOMENT'S ERROR. 
Marryat (Captain). PETER SIMPLE. 
I.-VCOB FAITHFULi -t ,>-ff\_jjt:t^ 



Marah(RlcluuP4w THB 

PEERAGE. '■MiilX.*^ 
THE OODSBS8. . c>' ^''^ 
THE loss. .''n^iHrA^ 
A.METAM0Bra08l8./>rnt.uL) >«Wr< 



M 



Mason (A. B. W.\ CLEMENTINA. 

Mathers (Helen). HONEY. 

« KIFF OF GRIFFITHSCOURT. 

>AM S SWEETHEART 

Meade (Mrs. L. TJ. DRI FT, 

Mltford rniiili— T THB SIGN OP TBft 

SPIDER. 
Montresor(F, F.). THE ALIEN'. 
Moore (Arthur I. THE GAY D ECEi VERS 
MorrlMH (Artbii^ THB HOLB IN 

THE WAM . 
NMblt(li.). THE RED HOUSB. 
NorriaCW.B^ HIS GRACB. 
GILES INGILBV^ 

THB CREDIT OF THB COUNTY. 

LORD LEONARD. 

MATTHEW AUSTIN. 
CL.\RISSA FURIOSA. 
01lpliaBt(Mrs.). THE LADY'S WALK. 

SIR ROBERTS FORTUNE. 
THE F'KODKiAI.S. 

Oppenhelm (E. Phillips). MASTER OF 

MEN. 

Parker (Gilbert). THE POMP OF THE 

I AVI IT- Tl i s. 
\V } n ; N \ A I \? ( » N D C A M E TO PO N T I AC 
:!!!■: 1 K.Mi. <}V T'HK SWORD. 
Pcoiberton (Max). THE FOOTSTEPS 

OF A THRONE. 
I CROWN THEE KING. 
Phillpotta (Eden). THE HUMAN BOV. 
( iflLDREN OF THE MIST. 

'Q.* THE WHITE WOLF. 
Kid2e(W. Pett>. A SON OFTHE STATBi 
I.ObT PROPERTY. 
GEORGE AND THE GENERAL. 
RttsseU (W. CM). A MARRIAOB AT 

SEA. 
ABANDONED. 

MY DANISH SWEETHEART. 

HIS ISLAND PRINCESS. 

SerfMWt (Adeline). THE MASTBR OP 

BEECHWOOD. 
BARBARA S MONEY. 
THE YELLOW I^IAMOXD. 
THE LOVE THAT OVKR^A^fF 
Surtees (R. S.). HANDl.EV CROSS. 

IUustrat^d. 

MR. SPONGE'S SPORTING TOUR. 

Illustrated 
ASK MAMMA. Uittttrated. 
Valentine (Hlt^ B. S.X VELDT AND 

L.^AGER. , 

Walford(Mi«.L.B.X MB. SMITB. 
COUSINS. 

THE BABY'S GRANDMOTHER. 
Wallace (General Lew). BEN-HUR. 

THE FAIR GOD. 

Watson(H. B. Marriot). THE ADVEN- 
TURERS. 

WeefcMlA. B.). PRISONERS OF WAR. 
WeUs(H.a.>. THESTOLEN BACILLUS. 
Wmti mny}, A PASSION ATB 

nLomiu. 



Digitized by Godgle 




I 



Digitized by Google 



