DK 

701 

S5D82 

c.l 

ROBARTS 

lb 

Presented  to  the 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO 
LIBRARY 

by  the 

ONTARIO  LEGISLATIVE 
LIBRARY 


1980 


-<v^ 


■'^,^.^        /  c^    /  C^ 


//i^       /  ^ 


THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 


/Vio/0.  /'v  .I/;-.  /'.  /'•(-/;. 


Till-:  Althor  (jn   kki.ikf  work. 


THE  STRUGGLE  FOR 
SCUTARI        ^ 

(TURK,  SLAV,  AND  ALBANIAN) 


^ 


BY 


M.  EDITH   DURHAM 

AUTHOR  OF 
THE  BURDEN  OF  THE  BALKANS,"  "HIGH  ALBANIA,"  ETC. 


7 -no  8 


ILLUSTRATED  BY  PHOTOGRAPHS  AND  SKETCHES 
BY  THE  AUTHOR 


LONDON 

EDWARD    ARNOLD 

1914 

[All  rights  reserved] 


TO 

MAUD  AND  HERBERT 


PREFACE 

None  who  have  not  Hvecl  through  the  past  few  years 
on  the  spot  can  imagine  the  fraud,  the  treachery,  the 
cold-blooded  cruelty  and  brutality  with  which  the 
various  rulers  of  Europe  have  striven,  each  against 
each,  to  obtain,  by  hook  or  by  crook,  possession  of, 
or  influence  over,  that  little  corner  of  land  in  the 
Near  East  which  has  been  lately  the  seat  of  war,  and 
is  now  the  seat  of  hopeless  misery. 

To  detail  the  mass  of  suffering  which  I  myself  have 
witnessed  would  take  several  volumes  of  monotonous 
horror.  To  unravel  the  complicated  mesh  of  intrigues 
and  hes  would  be  impossible.  I  have  tried  only  to 
tell  a  plain  tale  of  the  main  facts  that  came  directly 
under  my  notice,  and  in  no  w^ay  to  write  a  history  of 
the  war. 

One  short  explanation  only  I  would  give.  Want 
of  space  has  forced  me  to  take  for  granted  in  my 
readers  a  certain  amount  of  knowledge  about  the 
scene  of  action — North  Albania — which,  as  I  am 
aware,  is  a  rash  thing  to  do.  Such  as  desire  a  detailed 
account  of  the  country  I  must  refer  to  my  "  High 
Albania."  To  the  others  I  would  state  only  that 
Maltsor   (sometimes   spelt   ^lallissor)    means   merely 


viii  PREFACE 

"a  mountain-man":  from  '' mal,"  a  mountain; 
"'  malt,"  mountains — "  Maltsor,"  man  of  the  moun- 
tains. Every  mountain-man  all  over  Albania,  be  lie 
Moslem  or  Christian,  is  a  Maltsor.  The  Maltsors  are 
divided  into  very  numerous  tribes,  or  clans,  of  which 
the  Mirdites  form  one. 

There  has  been  so  much  misunderstanding  on  this 
subject  that  at  the  beginning  of  the  war  a  well-known 
illustrated  paper  pubhshed  a  photograph  of  some 
Circassians  labelled  "  Mallissori,  the  Albanian  shep- 
herd tribe,"  whereas  in  the  Scutari  vilayet  alone 
there  are  some  thirty  tribes. 

So  much  for  the  past.  The  present  is  unspeakably 
miserable.  Whole  districts  have  been  purposely  de- 
populated, for  the  aim  of  most  Balkan  States  is,  so  far 
as  possible,  to  evict  members  of  an  alien  race.  These, 
hunted  out  from  their  lands  and  robbed  of  all  they 
possess,  are  appealing  now  urgently  for  help.  Each 
month  has  so  far  brought  fresh  victims  of  racial 
ferocity. 

In  conclusion,  I  would  offer  most  hearty  thanks  to 
the  generous  donors  of  money  and  clothing — many 
of  them  complete  strangers  to  me — who  have  enabled 
me  to  relieve  some  of  the  misery  and  save  a  good 
many  lives.  And  I  would  beg  all  readers  never  to 
forget  that  there  is  one  thing  much  more  awful  than 
war,  and  that  is  the  period  which  follows  it,  when  such 
as  have  escaped  a  merciful  death  by  shot  and  shell 
are  left  to  face  starvation  on  the  mountain-side. 

M.  E.  DURHAM. 

May,  1914. 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER 

I.    PRELIMINARY 

II.    1908-1910       - 
III. 
IV.  -  .  . 

V.    THE    GREAT    BETRAYAL 


PAET  I 
BEFORE    THE    WAR 


PAGB 

3 

9 

23 

41 

71 


PART   II 
THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS 

VI.    THE    WINTER    OF    OUR    DISCONTENT    (1911-1912) 
VII.    MUBLEZ  1    MUBLEZ  II 
VIII.    THE    REFORM    COMMISSION        -  -  .  . 

IX.    PLOT   AND    COUNTERPLOT  -  -  .  . 

X.    THE    LAST    SCENE    OF    THE    FOURTH    ACT 


87 

122 
137 
148 
159 


PART  III 
WAR 


XI.  -  .  . 

XII. 

XIII.  THE    GLORIES    OF    WAR 

XIV.  THE    FALL   OF   SCUTARI 
XV,    SCUTARI 


181 

200 
227 
265 
379 


IX 


X  CONTENTS 

PART  IV 
THE  HABVEST  OF  WAR  ^^^^ 

CHAPTBK  _       293 

XVI     THE    HARVEST    OF   WAR  -  "  '  * 

-  311 

XVII.    LAST   WORI>S    - 

-  317 

INDEX 


LIST  OF  PLATES 

THE  ATTTHOR  ON  RELIEF  WOBK  (PHOTO  Br  MR.  B.  LOCH)      .......X'  "" 

THE   sultan's  accession  DAY,    1910 

MEN    OF    HOTI    COMING    TO    CELEBRATE    THE    CONSTITITTION     1908 

SOKOL   BATZI   (PHOTO   BY   MARUBBI    OF    SCUTARI) 

GROUP   OF   MALTSLl    E   JLiDHE   MEX 

MALTSORS   AT   TUZI 

RETURNED    REFUGEES   AT   BAITZA 

INNOCENT   YICTIMS 

ESSAD    PASHA 
DED    SOKO 

CETTIGNE'S   FIRST  PUBLIC   MEETING  ..." 

MONTENEGRIN   FRONTIER   BLOCKHOUSE    AT   DZAMIYA 

SERB    PEASANTS   FROM   IPEK    NAHIA   COME    TO   FETCH    RIFLES   AT   " 
ANDRIYEVITZA  .  .  ^J^*i^£.S   AT 

DECmCH   AND    THE   BURNT   TURKISH   BLOCKHOUSE 

MONTENEGRINS   OCCUPYING    THE    TURKISH   FOR^ESS    SHIPCHAN-IK 
DDIEDIATELY   AFTER  ITS    STOREXdER  .  ^^=^^^ 

THE   HOUYHNHNM 
T£[E   MONTENEGRINS   IN   TUZI 
UBA   MESIT 

MONTENEGRIN   ARMY   REITRING    OVER   BOJANA     BRIDGE     AS      THE 
ADMIRALS   ROWED   BENEATH   IT 

-  ''88 

V1CE-AD>nRAL  BURNEY  LANDING  AT  SCUTARI  TO  TAKE  POSSESSION      ^90 
BURNT   HOUSE   AT   GRIZHA 

-  296 

BURNT-OUT   CHILDREN   AT   SKJERZI 

-  296 


12 
12 

34 
34 
54 
80 
92 
92 

116 

116 

166 

174 

176 
194 


194 

198 
198 
216 


XI 


PART  I 

BEFORE  THE  WAR 

VIOLENCE    IS    THE    ENEMY    OF    RIGHT 


i 


THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 


CHAPTER   I 

PRELIMINARY 

"  The  Causes  and  Motives  of  Seditions  are  ;  Innovation  in 
Religion ;  Alteration  of  Lawes  and  Customes ;  Breaking  of  Privi- 
leges ;  Generall  Oppression  ;  and  Whatsoever  by  Offending 
People,  joyneth  and  knitteth  them  in  a  Common  Cause." — 
Bacon. 

*'  The  Turkish  Empire  is  like  a  very  old  house.  Leave 
it  untouched,  and  it  may  stand  yet  a  hundred  years. 
Tiy  to  repair  it — move  but  one  stone — and  it  will  all 
fall  down  on  your  head.''  Thus  said  to  me,  shrewdly, 
an  old  Albanian  in  1904;  and  the  outburst  of  wild 
rejoicing  which  took  place  when  the  Turks  proclaimed 
the  Constitution  in  1908,  filled  me  with  little,  if  any, 
hope;  for  it  sprang  from  a  false  conception  of  the  state 
of  affairs.  When,  to  my  amazement,  I  learnt  that  the 
Powers  of  Europe  had  taken  the  Young  Turks  at  their 
own  valuation  and  withdrawn  the  sole  means  of 
control — the  international  gendarmerie — from  Mace- 
donia, I  regarded  the  situation  as  already  lost.  That 
withdrawal  was,  in  fact,  expressly  planned  by  certain 
Powers,  who  wished  to  precipitate  the  downfall,  on 
the  principle  of  "  give  him  enough  rope  and  he  will 
hang  himself,"  and  there  were  diplomatists  who 
boasted  openly  that  it  would  hasten  the  end. 


4  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

Never  to  this  day  have  I  been  able  to  understand 
those  enthusiasts  at  home  and  abroad  who  believed 
that  the  Young  Turk  could  possibly  succeed,  over- 
whelmed the  new  Government  with  praise,  before 
it  had  had  time  to  display  the  smallest  capacity  for 
governing,  and  started  its  representatives  upon  their 
career,  surfeited  with  the  most  fulsome  flattery  and 
with  their  heads  more  than  sufficiently  turned. 

Be  it  clearly  understood  that  I  speak  only  of  Turkey 
in  Europe,  for  of  Asiatic  Turkey  I  have  no  experience. 
Consider  the  situation,  and  you  will  see  that  it  was 
bound  to  spell  disaster.  Turkey  in  Europe,  with  the 
exception  of  the  neighbourhoods  of  Constantinople 
and  Adrianople,  contained  comparatively  few  Turks, 
save  officials  and  soldiers.  The  native  population  con- 
sisted of  Greeks,  Bulgars,  Albanians,  Serbs,  and 
Kutzo  Vlahs,  with  a  considerable  sprinkling  of  Jews 
and  Gypsies. 

The  fierce  race  hatred  felt  by  each  of  the  four  first- 
named  peoples  for  each  other,  first  enabled  the  Turk 
to  penetrate  Europe.  The  same  hatred,  continued 
from  the  Early  Middle  Ages  up  to  the  present  day, 
enabled  him  to  remain. 

Having  subdued  one  race  after  the  other,  he  con- 
trived by  an  ingenious  policy  of  rubbing  one  against 
t'other  that  they  should  never  unite  against  him. 
He  did  not  succeed  in  assimilating  them.  Perhaps 
he  never  tried.  Even  those  who  turned  Moslem 
retained  their  language  and  a  great  deal  of  their  racial 
customs  and  characteristics. 

Partly  Turkish  policy,  partly  the  great  unsolved 
mystery  of  race,  kept  all  these  peoples  separate,  as  in 
water-tight  compartments. 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  5 

The  Turk  was  never  more  than  a  great  soldier. 
He  reached  his  zenith  in  the  seventeenth  century, 
and  then  declined  slowly.  As  the  Turkish  race  de- 
generated and  lost  power,  so  did  the  subject  peoples 
slowly  revive.  And  with  them  revived  their  old 
ambitions — the  hates  and  aspirations  of  the  Middle 
Ages.  Partly  by  their  own  efforts  and  partly  by  the 
help  of  one  or  other  of  the  Great  Powers,  Serb,  Greek, 
and  Bulgar  each  in  turn  emerged  from  the  Turkish 
Empire.  It  is  important  to  note  that  they  never  all 
rose  together,  for  the  sufficient  reason  that  their  am- 
bitions were  incompatible.  On  the  strength  of  their 
brief  medieval  empires,  each  claimed  the  greater  part 
of  the  peninsula. 

Turkey  disintegrated  slowly.  After  the  war  of 
1876-77,  only  the  fact  that  all  the  Great  Powers,  as 
well  as  all  the  small  Balkan  States,  desired  to  inherit 
the  Turk's  remaming  European  property  enabled  that 
tottering  Turkish  house  to  stand  at  all.  It  was  shored 
up  with  jealousies  both  within  and  without.  Whether 
the  short-lived  Constitution  and  Parliament  of  1876 
would  have  succeeded  better  than  the  ill-fated  ones 
of  1908  we  will  not  waste  time  in  inquii'ing.  Given 
the  many  already  irreconcilable  elements,  it  is  prob- 
able that  they  could  not.  Be  that  as  it  may,  Abdul 
Hamid  chose  to  pursue  the  policy  which  had  been 
successful  since  the  Middle  Ages.  With  amazing  skill 
and  entire  unscrupulousness,  he  played  Power  against 
Power,  race  against  race,  religion  against  religion,  and 
quelled  rebellion  by  massacre. 

It  was  a  losing  game,  and  its  weak  point  was  the 
apparently  immutable  fact  the  East  is  East  and  West 
is  West. 


6  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

While  the  Moslem  child,  if  he  went  to  school  at  all, 
squatted  in  the  balcony  of  the  village  mosque,  and 
droned  passages  from  the  Koran  in  a  tongue  he  did 
not  understand,  or,  as  I  have  seen  more  than  once, 
tried  to  learn  writing  by  inscribing  Arabic  letters  in 
the  air  with  outstretched  forefinger — the  hodja  set- 
ting aerial  copies  to  save  the  expense  of  pen  and 
paper — while,  in  short,  the  Moslem  stood  still,  Greek, 
Bulgar,  and  Serb  vied  with  each  other  in  the  number 
and  efficiency  of  the  schools  they  provided  in  the 
Turkish  Empire,  poured  out  money  lavishly,  and 
fought  and  intrigued  fiercely  over  the  children. 
Serb,  Greek,  Bulgar,  and  Montenegrin  teachers,  sub- 
sidized from  without,  were  each  so  many  centres  of 
national  propaganda.  Each  hated  each,  and  by 
fraud,  persuasion,  and  bribe  tried  to  attract  his 
rival's  scholars.  Nor  was  this  all.  Missionaries 
stepped  in  with  religious  propaganda.  American, 
French,  Austrian,  and  Italian  schools  swept  up  such 
children  as  escaped  the  Nationalists. 

The  teaching  of  all  these  rival  schools  had  one  thing 
in  common :  all  inspii'ed  a  hatred  of  Turkish  rule.  By 
the  time  the  Turk  realized  that  he,  too',  must  educate 
his  people,  he  was  already  hopelessly  outpaced. 

When  the  Young  Turk  revolted  against  Abdul 
Hamid's  methods,  he  was  the  last  of  all  the  land  to  do 
so.  For  the  Albanians  had  abeady  struck  for  national 
recognition,  had  demanded  the  right  to  have  schools, 
and  had  been  crushed;  but  were  working  hard  in 
secret. 

By  his  revolt  the  Young  Turk  only  hastened  his 
downfall.  He  stood  between  the  devil  and  the  deep 
sea,  and  to  those  on  the  spot  his  failure  seemed  in- 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  7 

evitable.     Personally  I  did  not  expect  his  European 
Empire  to  last  till  a  second  parliamentary  election. 

For  if  the  Young  Turk  allowed  his  subjects  the 
freedom  promised  in  the  paper  Constitution,  it  was 
obvious  that,  freed  from  all  restraint,  they  would  pro- 
gress even  faster  than  before  along  their  national  lines, 
would  absorb  still  more  of  the  Western  ideas  which 
are  collectively  termed  "  progress/' 

Though  we  will  not  stop  to  inquire  whither  they 
are  progressing,  we  should  note  that  these  ideas  are 
wholly  antipathetic  to  the  ideals  of    the  old-school 
Moslem.      The     subject    peoples,     in 
short,    were     already     far    advanced         ^^ 
upon   a    totally   different    path  w^hen    .O*"^ 
the    Young    Turk    started  —  heavily    '^^  ^J^ 
handicapped.     To  catch  them  up  was     ^■'/ 
mipossible.      His    only    plan  was    to 
cripple  their  development;    to  retard     ;  | 
the   growth   of    the    subject  peoples, 
till   he  himself   had  gamed   strength. 
And     this     method     he     deliberatelv   ^^baxian  moslem 

J  CHILD. 

adopted.  A  Young  Turk  officer, 
but  just  emerged  from  the  military  college,  ex- 
plained that  he  had  been  there  instructed  that 
"  the  duty  of  the  Government  is  to  consolidate  the 
Empire.  Under  bad  rule,  the  various  races  of  which 
the  Turkish  Empire  is  compounded  were  rapidly 
breaking  apart.  There  are  two  ways  by  which  an 
Empire  may  be  consolidated.  One  is  the  peaceful 
way— by  means  of  education.  But  that  takes 
time — and  we  have  no  tune.  There  remains 
only  the  second  method — the  sword.  By  the  sword 
we  must  cut  down  all  foes  to   the  Empii-e.      Thus 


8  THE  STRUGGLE  FOK  SCUTARI 

only  can  the  Empire  be  saved.  The  sword  of 
Islam !" 

But  this  plan  was  equally  bound  to  fail,  for  it  was 
almost  certain  to  unite  the  subject  races  in  a  common 
wrath — a  thing  Abdul  Hamid  had  skilfully  avoided 
doing — and  it  was  quite  certain  to  alienate  the  sym- 
pathies of  Europe. 

Nevertheless  the  Young  Turk  tried  it,  and  started 
upon  a  career  of  forcible  Ottomanization. 

An  enthusiast  explained  to  me  at  the  begmning  of 
the  new  order  of  thmgs:  "All  is  now  simplified.  The 
Greek,  the  Bulgar,  the  Serb,  the  Albanian  questions 
no  longer  exist.  We  have  passed  a  law,  and  all  are 
Osmanli.'' 

"  You  can  pass  a  law,  if  you  like,"'  said  I,  "  that  all 
cats  are  dogs;  but  they  will  remain  cats." 

But  the  Young  Turk  was  very  young,  and  imagined 
fondly  that  human  nature  can  be  changed  by  Acts  of 
Parliament.  He  tried  to  pitchfork  Nature  out,  and 
she  came  back  again  with  a  repeating  rifle. 

As  for  the  Great  Powers,  they  squatted  on  the  edge 
like  so  many  Canutes,  and  forbade  the  tide  to  rise. 

To  trace  the  unfolding  of  events  as  Tsaw  them  is  the 
purpose  of  this  book. 


CHAPTER  II 

1908-1910 
"  Coming  events  cast  their  shadows  before." — Campbell. 

In  December,  1908,  the  fateful  year  of  the  Constitu- 
tion, I  left  Scutari-Albania  and  returned  to  London, 
filled  with  the  gloomiest  forebodings.  The  future 
was  dark.  I  intended  to  return  to  Albania  in  the 
spring  of  1909  to  watch  events  on  the  spot.  But  an 
accident  and  consequent  illness  disabled  me  com- 
pletely. I  lay  helpless,  maddened  by  the  thought 
that  the  last  act  of  the  tragedy  of  the  Near  East  was 
about  to  be  played,  and  I  should  not  be  there  to  see. 

Letters  stated  that  the  situation  was  fast  becoming 
intolerable,  and  that  the  Chauvinism  of  the  Young 
Turk  would  shortly  bring  about  revolution. 

My  informant  was  correct.  In  another  fortnight 
the  counter-revolution,  as  it  was  called,  broke  out, 
raged  fiercely  for  a  while,  and  was  suppressed  with 
much  bloodshed. 

I  deeply  regretted  its  failure,  for  I  believed  that  its 
success  would  mevitably  cause  the  landing  of  inter- 
national troops  to  keep  order  and  protect  foreign 
subjects  in  Constantinople,  and  that  some  form  of 
European  control  woukl  be  the  best  solution  of  the 
Turkish  problems.     But  the  Young  Turk  triumphed. 

Then    came    a    strongly   dramatic    touch.     Abdul 


10  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

Hamid  was  made  the  scapegoat.  Every  crime  and 
error  of  the  late  Government — and  they  were  many 
— were  laid  to  his  account.  The  Young  Turk  ordered 
him  to  abdicate. 

Of  the  three  men  to  whom,  upon  April  27,  fell  the 
task  of  announcing  his  fate  to  "  Red  Hamid  " — who 
had  once  made  all  Europe  dance  to  his  piping — one 
was  the  now  notorious  Essad  Pasha. 

Essad  is  the  head  of  the  great  Toptani  family, 
the  rich  and  powerful  Beys  of  Tirana,  in  North 
Albania. 

Already,  twenty  years  ago,  when  Albania  showed 
strong  symptoms  of  national  ambitions,  Abdul  sus- 
pected the  Toptani  of  auning  too  high,  and  of  aspiring 
even  to  the  throne  of  Albania.  He  therefore  sum- 
moned Essad' s  elder  brother,  Gani  Bey,  to  Constanti- 
nople, and  made  him  his  aide-de-camp.  Shortly 
afterwards  Gani  was  murdered  by  the  son  of  the  then 
Grand  Vizier.  All  Albania  believed  it  was  by  Abdul's 
orders. 

Essad  swore  ultunate  vengeance.  Gjujo  i  Fais, 
Gani's  devoted  servant,  wasted  no  time.  He  com- 
mended his  wife  and  children  to  the  care  of  his  fellow- 
tribesmen,  bought  two  revolvers,  and  hurried  to  Con- 
stantinople. And  upon  the  Galata  bridge  he  shot 
Gani's  murderer  dead.  Throwing  his  spare  revolver 
into  the  water,  he  cried  in  triumph  that  he  had 
achieved  his  object,  and  awaited  arrest  calmly. 

Essad  waited  many  years,  but  in  the  end  tasted 
a  vengeance  sweeter  than  he  had  dared  hope.  He 
assisted  at  the  final  and  abject  humiliation  of  his  foe. 
It  was  he  who  spoke  the  fatal  words :  "  The  nation  hath 
pronounced  thee  deposed." 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  11 

Abdul  abdicated. 

The  Young  Turk  party  was  now  free  to  work  its 
will. 

And  in  April,  1910,  one  year  after  this  event,  better, 
but  far  from  well,  I  returned  to  Scutari, 

It  was  the  same  old  Scutari.  The  road  from 
Medua,  begun  thirty  years  ago,  and  paid  for  many 
tunes  in  taxes,  was  not  yet  finished.  The  Custom- 
house ofl&cials  still  took  bakshish  and  passed  my 
luggage  through. 

None  of  the  promised  works  had  as  yet  been  begun. 
Only  a  new  zigzag  horse-track  showed  raw  on  the 
side  of  Tarabosh.  It  had  been  constructed  by  forced 
labour.  Marko,  my  faithful  old  dragoman,  pointed  it 
out  resentfully,  for  he  had  been  one  of  the  workers. 
The  Turks,  he  said,  wanted  to  make  a  fortress  there, 
but  Montenegro  had  protested.  It  was  all  labour 
in  vain.  We  neither  of  us  then  had  any  idea  of 
the  mighty  part  Tarabosh  was  to  play  in  the  near 
future. 

April  27  brought  the  Sultan's  xA.ccession  day.  The 
celebrations  were  very  military.  An  archway  decor- 
ated with  revolvers,  rifles,  and  bayonets  was  erected 
at  the  entrance  of  the  Serai.  Scutari  looked  on, 
sullen  and  resentful. 

The  arch  was  held  to  be  symbolic.  "  We  must 
pass  under  their  guns  and  swords.''  The  garrison 
marched  by,  new  uniformed,  the  officers  ablaze  with 
gold  braid,  and  upon  fine  horses. 

"  Look  at  them,  the  devils  !"  said  an  Albanian  to 
me.  "  That  is  where  our  money  goes.  There  used 
to  be  one  big  thief;  now  there  are  a  lot  of  little 
ones." 


12  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

I  wondered  idly  if  this  were  a  good  definition  of 
democratic  government. 

The  last  ceremony  I  had  witnessed  at  that  Serai 
was  the  Proclamation  of  the  Constitution,  in  August, 
1908,  when  the  populace  flocked  in  in  a  frenzy  of  joy, 
and  believed  that  "  Konstitutzioon  ''  meant  freedom 
from  the  Turk. 

To-day  the  Turk  was  more  in  evidence  than  ever. 
Moslem  and  Christian  alike  muttered  discontent. 
They  would  pay  taxes  willingly,  they  said,  to  make 
roads,  to  regulate  rivers.  But  to  fatten  ofiicers,  and 
buy  gold  braid  for  them,  and  "  guns  to  kill  us  with  " — 
never  ! 

The  usual  tales  of  blackmail  and  false  imprisonment, 
and  of  imprisonment  without  trial,  were  rife.  "  Jus- 
tice ''  was,  if  possible,  worse  than  ever. 

It  was  rumoured  that  the  Moslems  would  rise  but 
for  the  fear  of  provoking  an  Austro-Italian  interven- 
tion. 

The  Catholics,  on  the  other  hand,  relied  upon 
Austria  with  an  amazing  faith.  If  a  Turkish  army 
dared  approach  the  Christian  mountains,  there  were 
folk  who  believed  that  the  Emperor  Franz  Josef 
hunself ,  upon  a  warhorse,  would  ride  at  the  head  of  his 
troops  to  their  rescue. 

The  Moslems  of  Kosovo  vilayet  were  already  in 
fierce  revolt.  They  would  not  pay  tax  till  assured 
that  it  would  be  expended  on  their  own  districts. 
The  Turkish  assertion  that  they  objected  to  any  form 
of  education  was  untrue. 

"  I  am  going  to  establish  schools,"  said  Djavid 
Pasha,  when  interviewed  by  a  journalist.  And  he 
went — with  many  battalions.     But  at  the  tune  that 


Tin:   CONTKAST 


ThK    Sll.IANS    AOKSSKIN    D.w.     lyio 


Mkn  <»k  I  Ion 


HKAhKM    \t\    IkU.NsMKN — (OMIM;    To   IKLKKKAIK    I  MK 
("nNSTITITIoN.     I90^^ 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  13 

this  educational  General  was  teaching  the  people 
with  artillery,  some  forty  of  the  children  of  the  in- 
surgents were  in  the  newly  opened  Albanian  Normal 
School  at  Elbasan.  The  Turks  proposed  starting 
Turkish  schools  only.  It  was  to  Ottomanization, 
not  to  education,  that  there  was  objection. 

Rumours,  wild  and  vague,  of  huge  Albanian  vic- 
tories poured  in,  and  were  officially  contradicted. 
Nevertheless,  it  was  certain  that  the  insurgents  were 
makmg  a  plucky  stand,  and  acting  well;  for  they 
released  all  the  prisoners  they  took  unharmed,  and 
there  were  no  charges  of  atrocities  brought  against 
them  by  the  Turks. 

Meantime  the  Young  Turk  officers  in  Scutari 
swaggered  about  in  new  uniforms,  got  drunk,  and 
talked  big  of  the  reconquest  of  all  the  Turk's  lost 
provinces — Servia,  Greece,  Bulgaria — and  of  the 
speedy  expulsion  of  the  English  from  Egypt,  and  the 
French  from  Algeria;  of  the  triumph  of  Islam,  and  the 
reconstruction  of  the  Great  Ottoman  Empire — to  be 
crowned  by  the  capture  of  Vienna. 

They  saw  visions  and  dreamed  dreams,  and  mean- 
while did  nothing  whatever  either  to  amend  or  con- 
solidate such  fragments  of  Empire  as  still  remained 
to  them. 

Albania  might  have  been  the  Turk's  stronghold  in 
Europe.  For,  unlike  the  rest  of  the  subject  peoples, 
the  Albanians  had  no  free  brethren  without,  with 
whom  to  desire  union. 

But  the  Young  Turks,  with  blind  folly,  sent  their 
worst  officials  there,  and  recklessly  stirred  up  feud 
and  hatred. 

The  comet  appeared,  and  the  minds  of  all  the  popu- 


14  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

lation  were  filled  with  the  direst  portents.  For  a 
comet  means  war  and  disaster.  Anxious  eyes  stared 
with  awe  at  its  short,  smudgy  tail. 

Sure  enough,  news  followed  that  Djavid  Pasha  had 
wreaked  fierce  vengeance  on  the  insurgents,  had 
forced  his  way  through  Kosovo  vilayet,  and  that 
Prenk  Pasha,  the  chief  of  the  Mirdites  (who  for 
political  reasons  had  been  made  a  member  of  the  Com- 
mittee of  Union  and  Progress  by  the  Young  Turks), 
had  promised  to  give  Djavid  and  eight  battalions  safe 
conduct  through  to  Scutari. 

The  other  Catholic  tribes  were  in  wild  dismay. 
They  had  discussed  frequently  the  desirability  of 
rising  in  support  of  the  Kosovo  men,  but  had  no 
reserve  at  all  of  ammunition.  Each  man  had 
merely  his  belt  of  forty  cartridges — some  not  even 
that. 

They  ran  hither  and  thither  for  advice.  One  that 
I  know  applied  thirteen  times  to  the  Austrian  Consu- 
late, and  received  no  answer. 

I  was  by  this  time  again  stricken  down  by  severe 
illness,  and  lay  in  the  Austrian  Hospital  quite  help- 
less between  bouts  of  agony  and  morphine.  And  as 
I  lay  and  writhed,  the  Albanians  came  and  wept 
over  me,  and  implored  me  to  get  up — to  write  to 
the  British  Government;  to  the  papers;  to  advise 
them;  to  help  them  to  buy  arms;  to  save  them  from 
the  Turks. 

I  was  dragged  into  a  sitting  posture,  propped  with 
pillows,  and  with  great  difiiculty  wrote  more  than 
one  article  detailing  the  state  of  things  and  making 
appeals.  But  the  agony  entailed  was  vain.  At  that 
tune  it  was  completely  impossible  to  break  through 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  15 

the  journalistic  ring  which  allowed  no  criticism  of 
Young  Turk  policy  to  be  published. 

And  to  the  inquiries  of,  "  Is  it  printed  yet  ?  Do 
the  people  in  England  know  V  I  could  only  answer 
"  No/'  and  counsel  that  resistance  would  be  madness. 
The  priests,  too,  worked  to  keep  the  people  quiet; 
and  the  Catholics  still  believed  in  Austria's  inten- 
tion ultimately  to  save  them,  and  order  Djavid  back. 
Only  the  Shala  tribe  prepared  to  resist,  and  blocked 
their  passes  with  felled  trees,  thereby  causing  Djavid 
to  take  another  route. 

One  Sunday  in  July  the  guns  of  the  citadel  boomed 
out  a  salute,  and  the  astonished  populace  heard  that 
Djavid  had  arrived.  Though  no  resistance  of  any 
kind  was  offered,  and  no  order  had  been  given  that 
the  populace  should  disarm,  the  Turkish  soldiers  at 
once  fell  on  all  who  wore  a  revolver  openly,  and  tore 
it  away.  In  their  ignorance,  they  even  disarmed 
officials  who  had  every  right  to  carry  a  weapon. 
Scutari  was  stunned,  but  could  do  nothing,  and  the 
whole  of  the  town  and  country  population  yielded 
up  their  arms  without  protest,  with  the  exception 
of  part  of  Shala,  which  refused,  and  of  the  Klimenti 
men,  w^ho  were  allowed  to  retain  theirs  in  order  to  act 
as  frontier  guards. 

Some  folk,  indeed,  rejoiced  that  all — both  Moslem 
and  Christian — were  disarmed,  saying,  "  Now  w^e  are 
all  equal,"  and  hoping  that  blood  feuds  would  con- 
sequently come  to  an  end. 

Had  the  Turks  now  "  let  well  alone,''  things  might 
have  turned  out  very  differently,  for  the  populace 
had  so  far  shown  remarkable  obedience  and  good- 
will.    But  the  Young  Turk  rushed  on  his  doom. 


16  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

Regardless  of  the  fact  that  by  surrendering  his 
rifle  the  peasant  in  many  cases  gave  up  his  most 
valuable  possession  without  any  compensation,  the 
Government  at  once  sent  troops  to  the  mountains  to 
make  a  list  of  names  for  compulsory  military  service, 
and  to  collect  taxes  from  rich  and  poor  alike.  In 
the  town  a  retrospective  tax  to  pay  for  the  Macedonian 
revolt  of  1903  was  even  demanded. 

The  soldiers  who  went  to  the  mountains  were  re- 
ported to  have  insulted  the  women.  The  tribesmen 
were  infuriated.  "  We  trusted  them  and  gave  up  our 
arms.  So  soon  as  we  are  helpless,  this  is  the  result.'' 
Most  foolishly  of  all,  the  Turks  instituted  public 
flogging  as  a  punishment,  and  more  than  one  well- 
known  Scutarene  was  flogged  in  front  of  the  Serai, 
to  the  tune  of  a  military  band, 
for  disobedience  to  military 
orders.  A  '*  state  of  siege  "  had 
been  proclaimed. 

A  blow,  by  Albanian  custom, 
can  be  avenged  only  by  blood. 
All  Scutari  was  furious. 

Forcible  Ottonianizing  began 
everywhere.  The  Normal  School 
at  Elbasan,  which   had   started 

HODJAS.  _  ' 

with  such  enthusiasm,  was  for- 
cibly closed.  So  were  all  other  Albanian  schools.  The 
newly  started  Albanian  papers  were  suppressed  one 
after  the  other,  and  the  editors  as  often  as  not  im- 
prisoned without  trial.  The  Scutari  paper  existed  only 
because  its  political  articles  dealt  with  nothmg  more 
recent  than  the  Franco-Prussian  War,  and  finally 
expired  because  it  was  not  sufficiently  up-to-date. 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  17 

It  was  forbidden  to  meution  iii  print  either  Albania 
or  the  Albanians.     All  were  now  Osmanli. 

Meanwhile  there  were  great  doings  over  the  border. 
Prince  Nikola  of  Montenegro  had  asked  for  and  ob- 
tained of  the  Powers,  leave  to  style  himself  King.  It 
was  currently  reported  that,  when  so  domg,  he  ob- 
tained leave  also  to  construct  a  kingdom.  "  How," 
asked  bazar  rumour,  "  can  you  be  a  King  without  a 
kingdom  V 

And  when,  in  August,  the  proclamation  of  kingship 
took  place  at  Cettigne,  rumour,  with  very  certain 
voice,  declared  that  this  step  had  been  taken  in  agree- 
ment with  King  Ferdinand.  He,  in  the  approaching 
construction  of  kingdoms,  would  have  Macedonia  for 
his  share,  and  Nikola  would  reign  over  Great  Servia. 
King  Peter's  career  would  terminate  abruptly.  This 
report  more  than  ever  excited  the  Albanians,  who 
were  convinced  that,  if  they  meant  to  strike  for 
European  recognition  and  independence,  it  must  be 
soon. 

All  was  confusion.  None  knew  where  to  turn  for 
help.  Scutari  swarmed  with  spies  as  never  before — 
Young  Turk  spies. 

Christian  and  Moslem  alike  muttered  that,  had  they 
known  what  it  meant,  they  would  never  have  laid 
down  their  arms.  All  cursed  Prenk  Pasha  for  letting 
Djavid  through.  But  as  the  Mii'dites,  too,  had  no 
reserve  of  ammunition,  they  could  not  in  any  case 
have  done  much. 

The  Catholics  were  specially  bitter.  They  had 
relied  on  Austria,  and  she  had  failed  them. 

Then  the  unexpected  happened.  It  always  does  in 
the  Balkan  Peninsula.     Two  or  thiee  families  of  the 


18  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

Hoti  and  Gruda  tribes,  who  had  relatives  over  the 
border,  suddenly  emigrated  into  Montenegro,  saying 
they  would  never  serve  in  the  Turkish  army.  The 
Turkish  authorities,  far  from  trying  to  conciliate  them, 
first  ordered  them  to  return  at  once,  and  then,  as  they 
did  not  obey,  made  matters  worse  by  burning  their 
houses  and  confiscating  their  goods. 

Such  was  the  situation  when  I  left  Scutari  in  Octo- 
ber, to  winter  in  Egypt  and  endeavour  to  pick  up 

strength. 

The  soothsayers  were  reading  blood  and  war  in  the 

bones  of  sheep  and  fowls,  and  the  women  were  wishing 

that  the  terrible  "  hylli  m'bisht "  (star  with  a  tail) 

had  never  blighted  Albania. 
News  followed  me  that  tribesmen  from  Maltsia  e 

madhe  were  shifting  wholesale  into  Montenegro,  and 
that  neither  Turk  nor  Austrian  knew  what  to  make  of 
the  situation. 

Neither  did  I  until,  on  January  23  of  the  new  year 
(1911),  I  received  a  letter  from  Cettigne,  from  a  young 
Albanian  I  knew  well:  "  The  Government  here  is  pay- 
ing us  four  kronen  a  day.     I  have  spoken  with  some 
of  the  Ministers.     In  the  sprmg  I' hope  to  receive 
weapons  from  the  Government,  and  go  into  Albania 
as  a  Komit.''     Komit,  it  should  be  noted,  is  the 
Albanian  for  the  Komitadgee  of  other  Balkan  lands. 
I  replied  at  once  that,  unless  all  Albania  were  armed 
and  rose  together,   insmTection  was  madness,   and 
begged  for  patience.     The  reply  came  that  all  the 
Maltsors  of  Scutari  vilayet— that  is,  the  Maltsia  e 
madhe,  the  Dukagini,  the  Pulati,  and  the  Mirditi— 
had  sworn  "  besa  '' ;  and  that  not  only  had  Montenegro 
promised  plenty  of  arms,  but  that  General  Riciotti 


BEFORE  THE  WAB  19 

Garibaldi  had  done  so  also,  and  would  send  volunteers 
from  Italy  as  well.  In  proof  of  this  was  given  a  fly- 
leaf circulated  by  Garibaldi,  giving  particulars  about 
his  "  Red  Shirts/'  Albania  was  either  to  be  freed 
or,  at  least,  to  gain  autonomy. 

Advice  and  remonstrance  were  all  in  vain.  On 
February  11  came  news:  "All  is  prepared  in  Mon- 
tenegro for  a  great  war.  In  the  spring  a  great  war 
will  certainly  break  out.''  And  on  March  4,  from 
Scutari:  "  Two  Turkish  warships  are  coming  to  Medua 
full  of  artillery  and  arms.  I  think  they  are  for  the 
Montenegrin  frontier."  Further  news — that  in  Cet- 
tigne  the  Albanian  rising  was  fixed  for  the  middle  of 
April. 

I  left  Egypt  for  Constantinople  in  March,  and  found 
on  arriving  that  the  revolt  had  broken  out  prema- 
turely among  the  Maltsors  of  Maltsia  e  madhe  only, 
and  that  they  were  carrying  all  before  them — had 
chased  away  the  scanty  Turkish  garrison  and  taken 
Tuzi.  This  sudden  commencement  before  due  prepa- 
ration was  a  fatal  error,  engineered  possibly  by  folk 
who  meant  the  revolt  to  fail.  It  had  been  intended 
that  Moslems  and  Christians  should  rise  together. 
But  the  Christians  having  begun,  Bedri  Pasha,  then 
Vali  of  Scutari,  being  very  short  of  troops  (there  were 
barely  1,000  men  in  the  Scutari  garrison),  proclaimed 
a  Holy  War,  and  called  on  the  Moslems  of  Scutari 
and  the  environs  to  rise  and  protect  the  Faith.  It 
is  a  cry  that  perhaps  never  fails.  The  Moslems 
flocked  to  receive  arms,  and  started  out. 

It  was  the  undoing  of  Albania.  The  Catholics 
received  them  peaceably,  and  begged  them  to  remem- 
ber their  promises,  and  that  they,  too,  were  Albanian. 


20  THE  STRUGGLE  FOE  SCUTARI 

The  Moslems,  however,  excited  by  their  hodjas,  chose 
to  fight — and  were  soundly  beaten.  On  their  retreat 
to  Scutari  they  revenged  themselves  by  burning  all 
Catholic  houses  on  their  path.  Bedri,  having  armed 
them,  could  not  disarm  them;  and  by  his  fatal  policy 
of  setting  Albanian  against  Albanian  hastened  the 
downfall  of  the  Turkish  Empire.  All  this  I  learnt 
from  letters  awaiting  me  at  Constantinople.  I  then 
saw  Ismail  Kemal  Bey  and  Dervish  Bey  of  Elbasan. 
Both  were  very  hopeful  that  the  rising  would  lead 
to  better  treatment  of  Albania,  but  they  knew  few 
details,  for  they  were  not  in  touch  with  the  north. 
The  British  Consulate  appeared  to  know  none,  and, 
moreover,  in  no  way  realized  the  gravity  of  the  situa- 
tion. Popovitch,  the  Montenegrin  Minister,  on  the 
contrary,  was  extremely  anxious,  which  confirmed 
me  in  the  belief  that  Montenegro  was  "  deeply 
dipped.'* 

He  complained  that  his  Government  "  gave  him  no 
instructions,''  and  left  him  "  to  explain  things  "  to 
the  Turkish  Government.  If  "  things  "  did  not  go 
right,  he  would  then  be  blamed. 

Ismail  Kemal  and  Dervish  Bey  wanted  me  to  start 
for  Elbasan.  Popovitch  urged  me  to  go  to  Podgoritza, 
for  he  knew  the  true  centre  of  affairs,  and  told  me  to 
start  by  the  next  boat. 

Strange  how  the  Fates  toss  one  !  I  had  not  in- 
tended agam  to  travel  or  spend  tune  in  Montenegro; 
had  vowed  especially  not  to  go  again  to  that  hotbed 
of  poHtical  intrigue,  Cettigne,  for  I  had  seen  too 
much  behind  the  scenes  of  the  "  bomb  affair,"  and 
been  entirely  disgusted.  The  best  men  I  knew  were 
in  prison.     Everyone  suspected  everyone  else.     Each 


BEFOEE  THE  AYAE  21 

told  me  not  to  trust  the  other,  and  all  told  tales  of 
treachery. 

Complaints  were  widespread  of  King  Nikola's  in- 
justice and  tyranny,  and  I  believed  that  war,  if  war 
it  was  to  be,  would  be  a  desperate  attempt  on  his  part 
to  regain  lost  power  and  popularity. 

I  did  not  wish  to  be  mixed  up  in  Montenegro's 
sordid  internal  politics.  But  in  the  Near  East  they 
say:  "  You  cannot  escape  what  is  written  for  you.'' 
Bad  weather  upset  my  plan  of  landing  at  Antivari, 
and  sent  me  via  Cattaro  to  Cettigne.  Cettigne  was 
all  agog.  To  my  astonishment,  I  found  I  was  ex- 
pected. To  my  still  greater  surprise,  I  was  plunged 
into  an  audience  with  almost  all  of  the  Eoyal  Family 
at  once. 

That  they  were  all  expecting  war  cheerfully,  was 
pretty  obvious.  And  they  expressed  delight  at  my 
avowed  intention  of  helping  my  friends,  the  insurgent 
Maltsors. 

There  was  much  chaff  and  laughter.  H.E.H. 
Danilo  was  especially  keen  on  war,  and  all  seemed 
very  pleased  with  the  way  things  were  shapmg.  It 
would  be  best,  they  said,  for  me  to  go  straight  to 
Podgoritza.  There  I  should  find  the  Queen's  cousin, 
General  Yanko  Vukotitch,  and  be  in  the  centre  of 
everything.  The  King  took  a  Jubilee  medal  off 
Prince  Petar  and  oif  ered  it  me.  I  did  not  want  to 
take  it,  and  in  my  confusion  let  it  drop  on  the  floor; 
but  one  of  the  Princesses  picked  it  up  and  pinned  it 
on  me. 

Princes  Danilo  and  Mii'ko  both  set  on  me  for  details 
about  Albania  and  the  Albanians,  about  which  they 
appeared  to  know  nothing  at  all. 


22  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

I  left  wondering  what  they  would  have  done  had 
I  told  them  I  knew  that  Montenegro  was  supplying 
the  arms,  and  with  last  year's  bazar  rumour  run- 
ning in  my  head:  "A  King  must  have  a 
kingdom  '/' 


six^h. 


LEWING    SCUTARI. 


CHAPTER  III 

"  In  all  the  world  there  are  no  human  beings  more  greatly  to 
be  pitied  than  those  with  whom  Kings  and  Emperors  bait  their 
hooks  when  they  angle  for  territory." 

The  Nationalist  Albanians,  refugees  from  Scutari 
and  elsewhere,  seized  on  me  at  once.  They  were 
going  into  Europe  to  obtain  political  support. 
Autonomy  for  Albania  was  their  object.  They 
lamented  bitterly  that  the  revolt  had  broken  out 
prematurely.  But  as  it  had  done  so,  we  agreed  that 
it  was  urgently  necessary  to  make  it  a  success,  and  to 
gain  European  recognition  of  Albania  and  her  rights. 
We  argued  late  into  the  night,  and  next  day  some 
other  guests  at  the  hotel  complained  to  me  that  it 
was  very  noisy. 

There  had  been  but  a  garrison  of  1,000  men  in 
Scutari  when  the  revolt  broke  out.  Had  the  insur- 
gents waited  till  all  the  mountains  were  armed,  they 
could,  no  doubt,  have  captured  the  town,  and  all  its 
arms  and  munition.  And  all  the  townsfolk,  except 
the  Turks,  would  have  been  with  them.  But  now 
reinforcements  were  hurrying  up.     So  were  events. 

23 


24  THE  STEUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

Tourgoud  Sliefket  Pasha,  who  was  in  command, 
called  a  five  days'  armistice,  telling  the  insurgents  that 
if  they  laid  down  their  arms  they  would  be  pardoned, 
except  certain  chiefs  who  were  named,  and  who 
would  be  condemned  to  death.  The  insurgents  called 
a  meeting  to  discuss  these  terms,  and  in  so  doing 
withdrew  from  the  strategical  points  they  were 
occupying. 

Then  came  an  unexpected  blow.  News  came  up 
hurriedly  from  Podgoritza  that,  though  two  days  of 
the  armistice  were  as  yet  unexpired,  the  Turks  were 
attacking  Dechich,  the  big  mountain  which  is  the  key 
to  a  large  part  of  the  tribelands.  So  fierce  was  the 
fight  that  the  firing  could  be  seen  and  heard  from  the 
height  near  Cettigne. 

The  battle  raged  all  Sunday,  May  14.  I  hurried 
down  next  day  to  Podgoritza,  only  to  learn  that 
Dechich  was  lost.  The  Turkish  flag  floated  on  its  great 
bare  summit,  which  towers  above  the  tiny  town  of 
Tuzi. 

Podgoritza  was  wild.  General  Yanko  Vukotitch, 
the  Queen's  cousin,  who  was  directing  operations — 
a  tall  man  and  broad  out  of  all  proportion — bulged  in 
his  khaki,  and  ran  hither  and  thither,  red  with  rage. 
The  loss  of  Dechich  upset  all  his  calculations.  Al- 
banian and  Turk  each  swore  that  the  other  had 
broken  faith.  The  insurgents  stated  that  at  four  in 
the  morning,  two  days  before  the  expiration  of  the 
armistice,  Tourgoud  Pasha  had  suddenly  advanced  his 
men  upon  Dechich;  that  the  very  small  force  left  there, 
together  with  some  that  hurried  to  the  spot,  fought 
till  their  ammunition  was  exhausted,  and  then  had  to 
retire  under  cover  of  night,  as  reinforcements  could 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  25 

not  get  up  in  time.  Tourgoud  replied  that  his  troops 
were  situated  near  bad  water;  that  he  had  therefore 
shifted  them  towards  better,  which  happened  to  be 
near  Dechich;  that  while  on  the  march  they  were 
fired  on,  which  justified  him  in  rushing  the  position. 
To  the  objection  that  troops  may  not  be  shifted  to 
better  positions  during  armistice,  he  retorted  that  the 
tribesmen  were  insurgents,  not  belligerents. 

"  Dechich  must  be  retaken  at  any  cost,"  was  the 
order  given  out  at  Podgoritza.  All  insurgents  found 
resting  after  the  first  fight  were  ordered  to  the  front 
by  the  Montenegrhi  Kapetan,  and  for  three  days 
there  was  sharp  fighting.  From  a  blockhouse  on  the 
very  frontier  I  saw,  in  the  distance,  my  first  battle, 
and  heard  for  the  first  time  the  swish  of  bullets  that 
are  aimed  at  live  bodies.  The  long  line  of  khaki- 
clad  Nizams  showed  most  distinctly  on  the  light  grey 
rocks.  It  occurred  to  me  it  was  odd  that  they  should 
be  di-essed  to  match  the  Transvaal. 

The  insurgents  were  invisible  on  the  other  side  of 
the  hill. 

The  Montenegrin  frontier  guard  growled,  like 
leashed  tigers,  whenever  the  artillery  boomed.  One 
man  flung  down  his  rifle  with  a  curse,  and  said  he'd 
go  home  if  he  might  not  use  it.  And  the  military 
telegraph  ticked  feverish  messages  to  Cettigne.  But 
it  was  the  beginning  of  the  end.  Men  armed  only  with 
rifles  cannot  take  a  height  which  is  defended  by 
machine-guns  and  mountain  artillery.  The  insurgents 
charged  repeatedly,  and  three  times  rushed  the  lower 
slopes,  but  were  finally  beaten  off. 

Rain  fell  in  torrents.  When  it  cleared,  we  saw, 
one  after  another,  the  houses  scattered  on  the  flanks 


26  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

of  Dechich  flame  up.  The  Turks  burnt  all  as  they 
advanced.  I  watched  the  burning  from  the  plain 
outside  Podgoritza  in  company  with  a  little  party  of 
refugee  children.  The  boys  talked  big  about  shooting 
Turks  and  the  exploits  of  their  grandfathers.  But  the 
little  girl  told  gravely  the  name  of  the  owner  of  each 
house  as  it  flared  in  turn,  and  added:  "  Ours  is  burnt. 
But,  thank  God  !  we  saved  the  cow.'' 

All  Podgoritza  talked  of  speedy  war,  and  I  learnt, 
to  my  surprise,  that  the  Montenegrin  guns  had  already 
been  to  the  frontier — and  come  back  again.  Some 
said  they  had  been  ordered  back  by  Russia.  Many 
deplored  it.  "  To  have  withdrawn  when  the  Turks 
had  only  1,000  troops  at  hand,  and  we  were  all  ready  V 

They  talked  war.  The  little  girl  with  the  cow 
already  knew  what  it  meant.     So  did  many  others. 

I  went  to  every  village  on  the  plain  with  the 
Kapetan.  Every  shed,  outhouse,  and  stable  was  full 
of  refugees — women,  children,  and  aged  only.  Any 
man  found  was  at  once  ordered  to  the  front.  I 
realized  that  Montenegro  was  indeed  directing  affairs. 

Those  families  which  had  migrated  in  the  winter  had 
brought  all  their  household  gear  and-  flocks  with  them. 
But  those  who  had  just  fled  from  the  burning  houses 
were  destitute.  There  were  nearly  5,000  on  the  plain, 
and  the  Triepshi  Mountains  were  reported  to  be 
sheltering  several  thousand  more. 

By  May  21  Tourgoud's  army  had  penetrated  Hoti, 
and  was  advancing  slowly,  burning  all  houses  on  his 
route,  and  desecrating  the  churches.  This  maddened 
the  Maltsors,  for  they  prided  themselves  on  not  having 
touched  a  mosque;  but  they  raged  impotent,  for,  so 
far,  Montenegro,  in  spite  of  her  promise  to  arm  them 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  27 

all,  had  only  given  some  1,500  rifles.  They  were  of  a 
pattern  discarded  by  the  Montenegrin  army  in  order 
that  tlie  pretence  might  be  kept  up  that  the  peasants 
sold  them  surreptitiously  to  the  tribesmen. 

In  reality  they  were  given  out  by  the  Serdar  (to 
give  him  his  native  title),  Yanko  Vukotitch,  the 
Queen's  cousin.  The  tribesmen — whose  faith  in 
Montenegro's  promises  never  to  desert  them  till 
Europe  had  guaranteed  their  rights  was  still  unshaken 
— came  nightly  to  his  quarters  in  the  hotel,  begging 
for  arms  and  advice.  My  room  being  opposite  his, 
I  occupied  a  fine  strategical  position. 

They  were  very  anxious.  Only  the  "  Five  Great 
Tribes"  (Kastrati,  Sk-reli,  Hoti,  Gruda,  and  Kli- 
menti)  were  armed  in  any  quantity,  and,  though  they 
kept  up  guerilla  warfare  with  great  pluck,  and  con- 
tinually captured  Turkish  rifles  and  cartridge-belts, 
it  was  obvious  they  could  not  stand  long  against  the 
overwlielming  forces  that  were  pouring  in. 

The  large  group  of  Dukagin  Maltsors  was  almost 
weaponless.  The  Shala-Shoshi  men,  who  had  blocked 
Djavid's  passage  the  year  before,  especially  prayed 
and  clamoured  for  arms. 

Yanko  dealt  them  out  now  in  driblets  only,  and, 
so  he  declared  to  me,  at  great  risk  to  himself,  as,  were 
it  proved  by  the  Turks  against  him,  the  Montenegrin 
Government  would  make  him  scapegoat. 

He  lamented  loudly  the  unexpected  speed  at  which 
the  Turks  were  bringing  up  reinforcements.  He  was 
further  angered  by  reports  from  the  Serb  districts  of 
Berani,  over  the  border,  that  the  Young  Turks  had 
closed  the  Montenegrin  school  there  and  flogged  and 
imprisoned  the  priest. 


28  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

Turkish  activity  had,  it  appeared,  quite  upset  his 
plans.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Turks  were  losing 
many  more  men  than  the  insurgents.  Letters  from 
Scutari  reported  all  available  hospital  space  full.  At 
first  all  wounded  were  kept  concealed  in  a  field  hospital 
at  Kopliku;  but  it  overflowed,  and  Tourgoud  tele- 
graphed to  Scutari.  The  telegram  was  badly  muddled 
in  transmission.  The  Vali  read  it:  "  300  prisoners. 
What  shall  I  do  ?"  and  replied:  "  Send  them  here  at 
once."'  The  Moslems  of  the  town,  still  sore  with  the 
beating  they  had  received,  hurried  to  the  quay  to 
jeer  at  the  Maltsor  prisoners,  and  met,  instead,  three 
londras  filled  with  wounded  Nizams. 

Montenegro  grinned  at  the  tale;  but  Montenegro, 
it  was  fairly  clear,  had  "  bitten  off  a  larger  chunk 
than  she  could  chew.'" 

The  Maltsors,  quite  innocent  of  Montenegro's  plans, 
were  fighting  only  for  their  own  autonomy;  nor  would 
they  follow  the  orders  of  the  Montenegrin  officers  sent 
to  advise  them. 

Each  man's  object  was  to  take  as  many  of  the 
enemies'  rifles  and  cartridges  as  possible.  "  I  had  a 
splendid  day.  I  went  to  battle  with  only  fourteen 
cartridges  and  I  came  home  with  a  belt  full  \"  was 
the  Maltsor's  idea  of  a  victory. 

An  ex-Minister  (Montenegro  swarms  with  ex-Min- 
isters)  explained  to  me  that,  when  a  general  subscrip- 
tion had  been  collected  during  the  winter  for  the 
purpose  of  raising  this  insurrection,  and  especially 
to  pay  for  the  families  of  the  insurgents  (for  it  was 
only  when  the  safety  of  their  families  was  guaranteed 
that  the  tribesmen  started  on  their  wild  struggle  for 
freedom),  he  had  throughout  combated  this  wild-cat 


BEFORE  THE  WAR 


29 


scheme  and  refused  to  subscribe.  The  tribesmen, 
he  said,  had  upset  all  plans  by  beginning  and  attract- 
ing the  eyes  of  Europe  before  Montenegro  was  ready, 
and  now  Montenegro  must  get  out  of  the  mess  as  best 
she  could. 

That  Montenegro  had  not  calculated  on  the  torrent 
of  refugees  was  evident.  Montenegrin  protests  against 
the  barbarity  of  burning  villages  were  loud.  The 
Montenegrin  paper,  Vjestmk,  said  sarcastically: 
"  Blessed  is  the  nation  that 
lives  in  a  land  where  such  civili- 
zation is  carried  out.  This  is 
the  work  of  an  army  led  by  a 
civilized  Young  Turk  leader  !" 

None  protested  louder  than 
big-voiced  Yanko,  who  got  red 
in  the  face  with  indignation. 
And  in  little  more  than  a  year 
Yanko  himself  was  to  out-Turk 
the  Turks  !     But  of  that  later. 

Then  the  pressing  question 
for  me  was  to  relieve  some  of 
the  miserable  victims.  A  crowd 
of  ragged,  poor  creatures,  their 
faces  already  yellow  and  sunken,  ppA 
poured  in  daily  in  hopes  of  the  cosron^c.  MaUsio.  t  -n^aj.Uc 
little  ration  of  maize  that  was  to 


REFrr.EE    WiiMAN. 


keep  body  and   soul   together. 

Women  who,  as  well-to-do  peasants,  had  housed  and  fed 
me  but  three  years  ago,  came,  destitute  and  exhausted 
— sometimes  an  eight  hours'  tramp — only  to  find  that 
the  supply  had  run  out.  The  work  was  very  badly 
organized.     The  children  starved  in  the  mountains, 


30  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

while  the  mothers  wandered  about  the  town  and 
begged  or  starved  for  two  days  before  the  next  ration 
of  raw  maize  was  given;  and  then,  so  destitute  were 
they,  they  were  often  forced  to  sell  it  at  a  loss  to  buy 
bread,  for  they  had  neither  pot  nor  bake-iron  with 
which  to  cook  it.  Where  and  how  to  find  money  I 
had  no  idea.  Ten  pounds  of  my  own  were  all  I  had 
to  begin  with.  I  meant  to  give  all  I  collected  to 
Stanko  Markovitch,  Governor  of  Podgoritza,  who 
was  in  charge  of  the  maize  distribution.  Scarcely 
had  I  given  him  a  pound  or  two,  however,  when  one 
after  another  Albanians,  Montenegrins,  and  foreign 
correspondents  came  and  begged  a  few  minutes' 
private  conversation,  and  besought  me  not  to  trust 
Stanko  with  a  penny. 

Tall,  dark,  and  sinister  Stanko,  in  a  glory  of  white 
coat,  silk  sash,  and  gold  braid,  peacocked  about  Pod- 
goritza— quite  the  most  decorative  thing  in  the  place 
— the  centre  of  a  little  band  of  intimates,  and  avoided 
by  everyone  else.  His  well-cut  features  were  quite 
expressionless,  and  his  eyes^never  looked  one  straight 
in  the  face. 

"  Beware  of  the  serpent,  lest  he  brte,"  said  Podgo- 
ritza, and  sketched  for  him  a  truly  Balkan  biography. 
That  he  was  at  present  engaged  in  embezzling  the 
maize  was  the  mildest  of  their  charges.  He  knew  no 
foreign  language,  and  had  been  raised  from  the  post 
of  elementary  schoolmaster  to  that  of  Governor  of 
the  largest  town  in  Montenegro,  because — said  popu- 
lar voice — he  had  successfully  arranged  the  sudden 
death  of  someone  obnoxious  to  the  Government. 
Two  of  his  brothers  had  been  imprisoned  for  embez- 
zling public  funds,  it  was  said,  and  part  of  the  missing 


BEFOKE  THE  WAR  31 

money  found  in  the  family  house.  It  was  not  a  tale 
to  inspire  confidence.  All  friends  of  the  insurgents 
begged  me  to  keep  the  money  myself,  and  give  it 
straight  to  the  needy.  The  foreign  correspondents 
undertook  to  collect  money  through  their  respective 
papers,  on  this  understanding.  It  dribbled  in  slowly 
from  all  over  Europe,  had  to  be  acknowledged  in 
various  languages,  and  the  postal  orders  were  cashed 
by  the  Podgoritza  post-office  in  the  gold  of  any  country 
that  it  happened  to  possess;  Russian,  Bulgarian,  and 
Austrian  gold  pieces  were  mixed  with  sovereigns, 
twenty-franc  pieces,  and  big  American  five-  and  ten- 
dollar  pieces.  There  were  diflerent  rates  of  exchange 
for  all,  and  the  keeping  of  the  account  was  a  nightmare 
to  me.  Nor  should  I  have  known  how  to  manage  the 
work  had  not  Fortune  sent  me  a  young  Scutarene, 
Kol  Martinaj,  Professor  of  Albanian  in  a  college  in 
South  Italy. 

He  gave  up  most  of  his  time  to  helping  me,  investi- 
gated cases,  and  advised  where  and  what  to  buy. 
Together  we  tramped  the  slums  of  the  town,  and 
scrambled  down  the  cliffs  and  into  the  caves  along  the 
river  banks. 

We  worked  solely  for  the  refugee  families;  for  the 
wounded  were  provided  for  in  one  barrack  of  the  Voyni 
Stan.  An  Austrian  surgeon,  in  Montenegrin  employ, 
was  in  charge.  As  the  Maltsors  ahnost  always  fought 
from  cover,  the  number  of  wounded  was  not  great; 
I  think  fifty  was  the  most  we  ever  had  at  a  tune.  I 
had  little  time  save  for  an  occasional  \isit,  to  see  how 
they  were  getting  on.  There  were  some  most  in- 
terestmg  cases  though,  which  showed  the  strong 
vitality  of  the  race,  and  the  surgeon  used  to  remark 


32  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

jokingly  that  he  had  no  idea  before  that  he  could  do 
such  wonderful  cures. 

I  recall  particularly  one  man,  who  had  had  a  part 
of  one  parietal  bone  shot  of!,  and  had  been  left  for 
dead  on  the  mountain-side  two  days,  with  his  brain 
exposed.  Luckily  for  him,  it  was  not  pecked  by  the 
carrion  crows.  The  women  rolled  him  in  a  blanket 
and  dragged  him  down  some  ten  hours  to  Podgoritza. 
The  doctor  duly  covered  the  brain  and  dressed  the 
wound ;  the  man  recovered  consciousness,  but  was  at 
first  badly  paralyzed  on  one  side.  In  a  few  weeks, 
however,  he  completely  recovered,  and  I  saw  hhn  walk 
out  of  the  hospital.  A  slight  tendency  to  drag  one 
foot  was  the  only  sign  of  his  serious  wound. 

Even  more  surprising  was  a  man  who  was  shot 
clean  through  the  head.  The  bullet  went  in  by  the 
root  of  the  nose,  just  missing  the  corner  of  the  eye, 
and  passed  out  through  the  occipital,  having  therefore 
raked  the  base  of  the  brain.  His  wife  brought  him 
in  unconscious,  with  a  raging  temperature.  "  Menin- 
gitis,'' said  the  doctor.  "  He  won  t  last  the  day." 
But  he  did.  He  lay  for  three  days.  His  wife  de- 
clared he  understood,  because  when  anything  was 
put  in  his  hand  he  raised  it  at  once  to  his  mouth. 
She  gave  hun  water  from  time  to  time.  On  the  third 
day  his  temperature  began  to  fall;  and  shortly  after- 
wards the  doctor  arrived  one  day  to  find  that  the 
wife  had  propped  him  up  in  bed,  and  that  he  had 
eaten  over  a  pound  of  bread— a  present  from  some  of 
his  friends.  He  proceeded  to  get  well  without  further 
trouble.  His  memory  was  good,  and  his  mind  quite 
clear;  but  he  could  walk  only  with  great  difficulty, 
and  one  arm  remained  quite  paralyzed. 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  33 

In  all  I  believe  only  fourteen  died  in  hospital.  One 
of  these  was  a  boy  of  fifteen;  another  was  a  man 
who  went  out  cured  and  came  back  mortally  wounded 
in  a  fight  only  two  days  afterwards. 

My  only  contribution  to  the  help  of  the  wounded 
was  that,  later  on,  I  paid  for  all  the  drugs  and  dress- 
ings that  had  been  used  for  them.  The  Montenegrin 
authorities,  when  they  heard  of  my  intentions,  con- 
ceived the  brilliant  idea  of  asking  double,  for  they 
had  not  forgiven  me  for  keeping  the  funds  in  my  own 
hands.  I  was  warned  in  tune,  however,  and  the 
doctor,  who  was  an  honest  man,  thwarted  this  by 
gomg  through  his  prescriptions  for  me  and  checking 
the  amount. 

But  this  was  later.  Now,  in  mid-May,  life  was 
crowded  with  incidents.  Correspondents  swarmed  in. 
Most  of  them  rushed  to  me  for  information,  and  then 
rushed  away  again;  only  the  Italians  were  permanent. 
I  was  corresponding  for  two  papers  myself.  The 
weather  grew  hotter  and  hotter,  the  white  dust 
thicker  and  thicker,  and  each  day  more  exhausting 
than  the  last. 

Podgoritza  was  haunted  by  picturesque  figures. 
Chief  among  these  was  old  Sokol  Batzi,  for  whom, 
though  he  is  now  blamed  alike  by  Montenegrin  and 
Albanian,  I  have  both  esteem  and  respect.  He  acted 
as  best  he  knew,  according  to  his  dim  lights,  and  be- 
lieved that  he  was  acting  for  the  good  of  his  country. 

A  burly  figure,  in  full  Albanian  dress,  and  with 
great  white  mustachios  like  walrus  tusks,  he  was 
King  Nikola's  right-hand  man  throughout  the  insur- 
rection. Chief  of  the  Gruda  tribe,  in  his  young  days 
he  was  one  of  Abdul  Hamid's  famous  Albanian  guard, 

3 


34  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

but  he  left  it  owing  to  the  way  the  Turks  maltreated 
his  country,  and  fell,  therefore,  upon  evil  times.  After 
the  war  of  1876-77  he  sided  with  the  party  which 
wished  for  free  Albania,  and  in  consequence  was 
forced  to  flee  for  his  life.  Hunted  like  wild  beasts, 
he  and  his  wife  took  refuge  with  his  wife's  tribe, 
Triepshi,  which  was  then  annexed  by  Montenegro  as 
part  of  the  spoils  of  war,  and  passed  a  terrible  nine 
months,  searched  for  by  both  Montenegrins  and 
Turks.  Finally,  King  Nikola,  recognizing  his  value 
as  an  influential  chieftain,  gave  him  a  house  and  land 
and  employed  him  largely  for  Albanian  affairs.  Sokol 
served  him  with  doglike  fidelity  and  touching  faith, 
but  never  forgot  his  ancestral  home  across  the  border. 
When  the  Young  Turk  regime  started,  he  hoped  to 
return  to  it,  but  a  short  visit  showed  him  that  was 
impossible,  and  he  returned  to  Podgoritza,  to  play 
an  important  part  in  the  drama  of  the  next  few  years. 
Poor  Sokol !  he  was  used  as  a  cat's-paw.  But  I 
believe  that  he  acted  in  perfect  good  faith. 

Then  there  was  old  Mirash  Lutzi  of  the  Kastrati, 
wiry  as  a  mountain  cat  and  wily  as  a  fox,  addicted, 
too,  to  gold  braid  and  silk  sashes — Mirash,  indomit- 
able, incorrigible,  ready  to  make  the  best  of  the  most 
impossible  circumstances,  with  a  jest  for  ever  on  his 
tongue  and  a  laugh  always  ready.  I  met  him  first 
ten  years  ago  on  the  piazza  of  San  Marko,  Venice. 
*'  When  I  first  saw  you,  you  were  giving  maize  to  the 
pigeons,"  says  Mirash.  "  I  never  thought,  then,  I 
should  see  you  give  maize  to  my  own  people  V  Four 
times  have  his  house  and  all  his  possessions  been 
burnt  to  the  ground,  but,  phcenix-like,  he  has  always 
risen  from  the  ashes. 


BEFOEE  THE  WAR  35 

Just  a  month  before  the  outbreak  of  the  insurrec- 
tion, he  and  his  family  group  had  established  them- 
selves in  his  third  house,  a  very  fine  one,  with  stable 
and  outbuildings;  Tourgoud's  army  had  left  it  a 
blackened  ruin.  "  Mo  matter,"  said  Mirash  serenely; 
"  I  borrowed  money  on  it  from  a  Turk.  The  loss 
is  his." 

War  with  the  Turks,  the  liberation  of  Albania  from 
the  Turks,  has  been  the  mainspring  of  Mii'ash's  exis- 
tence. With  this  end  in  view,  he  has  entered,  with 
enthusiasm,  into  the  plots  of  any  and  every  Power 
and  individual  who  had  designs  against  his  enemy. 

Quite  illiterate  and  sprung  from  a  family  of  no 
importance,  his  quick  wits  and  native  shrewdness 
have  raised  hun  to  a  position  of  considerable  influence. 
His  son  Nikola,  a  true  patriot  and  a  gallant  fighter, 
we  seldom  saw,  except  when  he  came  down  to  get  a 
wound  or  two  dressed,  only  to  return  to  the  front  as 
soon  as  possible. 

Mehmet  Shpend  (Mehmet  the  Eaven),  a  Catholic, 
in  spite  of  his  Moslem  name,  one  of  the  most  influen- 
tial of  the  Shala  headmen,  was  another  notable.  A 
strange,  wild  creature,  dark-eyed,  lithe  in  spite  of 
his  years,  decked  with  silver  chains,  and  the  silver 
and  crimson  waistcoat,  which  is  characteristic  of  his 
district,  he  played  a  great  part  in  the  insurrection. 
Of  Mehmet  it  is  told  that  once,  when  crossing  a  pass 
that  was  deep  in  snow,  he  and  his  wife  found  a  perish- 
ing lamb.  Mehmet  at  once  gave  it  to  his  wife  to  suckle, 
and  they  took  it  safely  home. 

Shala  had  blocked  the  passes  with  hewn  trees  last 
year,  and  Mehmet  and  a  small  following  had  subse- 
quently refused  to  yield  up  their  arms.     They  took 


36  THE  STEUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

to  the  heights,  and  the  Turks  burnt  their  houses  as 
punishment. 

To  Mehniet,  Shala  was  the  centre  of  the  world.  He 
could  grasp  no  external  politics.  That  a  great  Power 
should  come  to  Shala's  rescue  was  all  his  desire; 
and  if  only  Shala  could  get  a  sufficiency  of  arms,  it 
would  be  invincible.  The  whole  of  Shala-Shoshi  was 
ready,  said  Mehmet,  but  Montenegro  had  not  given 
the  promised  weapons.  He  prayed  me  to  ask  help 
of  England.  Nor  could  he,  nor  any  of  them,  under- 
stand that  England  would  only  give  help  where  she 
expected  gain,  for  they  always  declared  themselves 
ready  to  serve  the  King  of  England  loyally. 

Mehmet,  like  the  rest  of  the  Maltsors,  was  wholly 
ignorant  of  the  science  of  war,  but  an  adept  m  the 
art  of  stalking  and  sniping  small  Turkish  outposts, 
and  the  capture  of  their  rifles  and  cartridge  belts 
filled  his  soul  with  joy. 

Most  picturesque  of  all,  perhaps,  was  Gelosh  Djoko 
of  Kastrati,  whose  majestic  figure  caused  even  the 
most  hardened  war-correspondents  to  gasp  with  ad- 
miration. Some  six  foot  four  in  height  and  splen- 
didly built,  his  manners  were  as  fine' as  his  propor- 
tions— an  engaging  blend  of  childish  simplicity  and 
natural  politeness. 

I  remember  keenly  how  a  loud  knocking  waked  me 
once  at  midnight.  "  A  Maltsor  must  see  you  at  once." 
It  was  just  at  the  tune  of  the  hardest  fighting.  I 
expected  news,  slipped  on  a  skirt  and  a  greatcoat, 
and  went  down  barefoot.  There  stood  Gelosh,  who 
had  come  down  from  the  mountains  to  say  good-bye 
to  his  wife  and  his  beloved  little  son  before  starting 
on  a  wild  enterprise. 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  37 

He  came  now  to  commend  them  to  my  care,  and 
to  ask  me  to  drink  a  glass  to  luck  with  him.  We  drank 
solemnly  a  glass  of  rakia  apiece.  "  Tu  nghiat  tjeter  " 
(Long  life  to  you  !).  He  kissed  my  hand  with 
great  style,  and  disappeared  into  the  night.  He 
and  many  another  mountain  man  remain  pictured 
in  my  memory,  pathetically  medieval  beings,  who 
had  given  up  their  all  in  a  blind  struggle  for  freedom, 
and  were  quite  unable  to  understand  that  the  great 
engine  of  Europe  rolled  pitilessly  on,  heedless  of  their 
fate,  ready,  in  fact,  to  pass  right  over  them  if  they 
stood  in  the  way. 

Most  of  them  were  old  acquaintances  of  mine, 
whose  hospitality  I  had  received  in  past  years.  Now 
they  came,  with  the  most  painful  faith  in  my  powers, 
and  besought  my  help.  The  mere  fact  that  I  could 
read  and  write,  and  so  communicate  with  the  outer 
world,  was  a  mars-el.  I  protested  vainly  that  I  had 
no  political  influence;  that  a  little  help  for  their  wives 
and  children  was  all  I  could  promise.  They  treated 
me  with  extraordinary  respect  and  regard,  and  gave 
me  the  title  "  Kralitza  Maltsorvet  "  (Queen  of  the 
mountain  men),  a  title  which  subsequently  gave 
offence  to  both  the  Turkish  and  the  Montenegrin 
authorities. 

On  May  24  Podgoritza  was  startled.  General 
Yanko  Vukotitch  was  suddenly  summoned  by  the 
King  to  Cettigne.     Did  it  mean  war  ? 

On  the  26th  he  was  replaced  by  Brigadier  Blazho 
Boshkovitch,  owing,  it  was  said,  to  a  protest  made 
by  the  Turkish  Government  against  Yanko's  warlike 
preparations  on  the  frontier. 

Blazho,  a  heavy,  good-natured  man  of  no  apparent 


38  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

intellectual  capacity,  was,  however,  a  mere  figurehead. 
Yanko  went  backwards  and  forwards,  and  Montene- 
gro worked  as  it  had  not  worked  for  many  a  long  year. 
For  thirty-five  years  Montenegro  had  sat  and  smoked 
and  boozed  and  complained  of  poverty,  while  its  plains 
and  forests,  especially  the  fat  coast-lands  of  Antivari, 
remained  unworked  and  undeveloped.  Now  gangs 
of  men  toiled  day  and  night.  Artillery  tracks  to 
Rumia  (whence  to  attack  Tarabosh),  to  Fundina,  and 
Triepshi,  were  soon  begun,  and  the  long-delayed 
carriage-road  to  Andriyevitza  hurried  towards  comple- 
tion. Had  all  this  energy  but  been  expended  in  past 
years,  upon  cultivation  and  irrigation,  Montenegro 
might  by  now  have  been  comparatively  well  off. 

On  May  27  we  heard  that  Russia  had  protested  to 
Turkey  on  Montenegro's  behalf — "  that  Montenegro 
was  being  put  to  great  expense  by  the  quantities  of 
Turkish  troops  massed  on  her  border."  Turkey  re- 
plied thatthe  troops  were  not  threatening  Montenegro, 
and  Montenegro  had  better  mind  her  own  business. 

By  this  time  Montenegro  had  two  whole  battalions 
on  the  frontier  near  Podgoritza.  Pack-horses  carried 
cartridges  nightly  to  the  yet  roadless  outposts,  and 
the  guns  stood  all  ready  at  the  Voyni  Stan  awaiting 
the  completion  of  the  artillery  tracks. 

My  diary  of  28th  notes:  "Rifles  are  being  dis- 
tributed to  all  over  eighteen,  and  everyone  is  agog. 
We  are  on  complete  war-footing.  Every  man  has 
orders  to  hold  himself  in  readiness,  with  five  days' 
provisions  and  two  pairs  of  opanke  (raw-hide  sandals), 
to  start  at  any  moment.  The  Chetas  are  being  raised 
from  100  to  150  men.  Eight  to  ten  Chetas  make  a 
battalion.    All   work   is    at   a   standstill.     Extraor- 


BEFOKE  THE  WAR  39 

dinar}"  state  of  nervous  tension.     Place  crammed  with 
staff  officers." 

That  same  day  the  Turkish  Consul  sold  his  horse. 
This  at  once  raised  expectation  to  fever  heat.  It  was 
a  sure  sign,  said  everyone,  of  his  unmediate  with- 
drawal and  the  declaration  of  war.  At  night  we  sat 
under  the  nuilberry-trees  in  front  of  the  Hotel  Europa, 
a  crowd  of  olHcers,  officials,  patriots,  correspondents, 
and  scalliwags,  all  in  a  patch  of  brilliant  light  from 
the  glaring,  spluttermg  acetylene  lamp.     Out  of  the 


MONTEXEOKIN   OX-CART. 


darkness  creaked  and  groaned  the  ungreased  wheels 
of  the  ox-carts;  they  filed  slowly  past,  stacked  liigh 
with  ammunition,  and  disappeared  into  the  night,  to 
crawl  secretly  up  to  Kolashin  and  other  border  posts. 
The  crowd  roared  applause.  The  officers  drank  to 
speedy  war  and  boasted  endlessly  of  theii'  valour. 
And  long  after  dark  the  hooded  crows  which  swarm 
in  Podgoiitza,  came  flapping  heavily  home,  and 
settled,  with  hoarse  cries,  on  the  branches  overhead. 
"  They  have  come  from  the  battlefield,"  said  folk; 
"  they  are  crammed  with  Turkish  carrion." 


40  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

Grey  dawn  brought  ill  news  of  another  fight  and 
ten  more  wounded  for  the  hospital.  The  little  band 
of  insurgents  was  fighting  hopeless  odds.  The  Turks 
were  now  attacking  from  the  Gusinje  side  as  well. 
Only  a  small  stretch  of  mountain-land  separated  the 
two  armies — the  natural  fortress  of  the  situation, 
Kapa  Brojs.  If  this  height  and  the  pass  were  lost, 
Shala  and  all  the  Dukagins  would  be  cut  off  from  the 
five  great  tribes,  and  the  position,  hopeless. 

Friends  of  Albania  were  cheered  by  news  that  Ri- 
ciotti  Garibaldi  had  armed  the  Mirdites  and  South 
Albania  and  that  they  would  rise  at  once;  but  this 
soon  proved  quite  false.  Only  speedy  help  could 
save  the  insurgents.  They  harried  the  Turks  by 
ceaseless  sniping;  but  could  not  hold  Traboina  against 
machine-guns,  and  lost  the  position  and  many  men. 
The  Turks  lost  more — but  they  could  afford  to. 

The  tribesmen  grew  bitter  and  sore.  Bitter  with 
Austria,  who  first  had  not  protected  them  from  the 
Young  Turks'  attempts  at  forcible  Ottomanization, 
and  now,  though  Protector  of  the  Catholic  Faith, 
allowed  their  churches  to  be  pillaged  and  desecrated; 
bitter  intensely  with  Montenegro,  who  had  promised 
arms  to  all  and  now  withheld  them;  and  bitter  that 
Garibaldi's  promised  help  had  not  arrived.  Some 
dozen  young  volunteers  who  had  come  independently 
were  all  that  appeared  of  the  hoped-for  and  promised 
Italian  reinforcements. 


CHAPTER  IV 

"  How  the  Summer  wore  away  and  Hope  with  it." 

On  May  30  poor  little  Padre  Ludwig,  of  Thethi-Shala, 
came  knocking  at  my  door  before  8  a.m.  Haggard 
and  quite  exhausted,  he  had  tramped  for  four  days 
— crossing  three  snow  passes,  and  dodging  between 
the  Turkish  lines.  Almost  weeping,  he  threw  himself 
down,  saying:  "  Durami,  Durami,  in  God's  name,  tell 
me  what  to  do  \"  Shala,  he  said,  possessed  only 
some  500  old  rifles  (those  which  had  not  been  sur- 
rendered last  year),  so  was  practically  defenceless. 
A  short  time  ago  the  Thethi  men  had  gone  as  usual 
to  buy  maize  in  Gusinje,  and  were  refused  by  the 
Turkish  Kaimmakam.  "  We  have  no  maize  for 
Cluistians.     Go  and  ask  your  papa  in  Montenegro  !" 

**  So  those  who  do  not  rise  must  starve,''  said  the 
poor  Franciscan;  "  and  if  they  do  rise,  they'll  be 
massacred."  Montenegro  had  promised  arms,  and 
not  given  them.  He  was  specially  anxious,  too,  to 
save  his  little  church  from  desecration. 

Wearily  he  rose  and  trudged  off  in  search  of  Blazho 
Boshkovitch,  and  came  back  desperate.  Blazho  was 
not  empowered  to  give  arms. 

His  only  chance  was  to  go  to  Cettigne  and  entreat 
the  King  and  Yanko.  But  he  was  too  exhausted  to 
manage  the  eight  hours'  tramp.  I  fed  him,  and  sent 
him   up   in   the  motor   in   the   afternoon.     Cettigne 

41 


42  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

listened  to  his  plea,  and  he  came  back  happy  with  the 
promise  of  a  thousand  rifles  for  Shala,  a  considerable 
number  of  which  were  successfully  passed  up. 

It  looked  as  though  Montenegro  really  meant  action, 
for  that  same  night  300  horseloads  of  small  ammuni- 
tion went  up  to  the  frontier. 

On  June  1  the  Brigadier  was  extraordinarily  cheery 
and  hopeful.  All  Montenegro  seemed  bent  on  fight- 
ing Turks. 

StroUmg  along  the  Ribnitza,  I  saw  a  party  of 
little  boys  bathing,  and  was  pleased  with  the  unusual 
sight;  for  the  Montenegrins  are  no  great  lovers  of 
cleanliness.  A  long  howl,  like  a  pack  of  wolves,  made 
me  turn,  and  I  saw  a  score  of  big  Montenegrin  boys 
dashing  down  on  the  naked  and  defenceless  little 
bathers.  The  situation  was  at  once  obvious.  The 
bathers  were  Moslems,  and  the  Christians  were  going 
to  impress  the  merits  of  the  Orthodox  Church  upon 
them  with  the  sticks  they  brandished  in  their 
hands. 

The  terrified  little  Moslems  dashed  out  of  the 
water,  seized  their  clothes,  and  fled.  The  bigger  ones 
got  away.  The  little  ones  saw  me,  and  rushed, 
tumbling  and  struggling  half  in  and  half  out  of  their 
breeches,  to  me  for  protection.  It  was  a  close  race. 
I  dashed  between  the  two  parties,  and  by  great  luck 
grabbed  the  leading  Montenegrin  by  the  collar  as  he 
passed.  This  checked  the  whole  lot.  They  were 
indeed  paralyzed  with  amazement.  "  You  cuckoo  V 
said  I.  "  Twenty  of  you  to  attack  little  boys  V 
Now,  "  cuckoo  "  in  Montenegrin  is  extremely  rude. 

Before  anyone  had  recovered  from  surprise,  a 
Moslem  man  came  to  the  help  of  the  little  boys,  who 


BEFOEE  THE  WAR  43 

were  hastily  dressing  behind  me,  and  escorted  them 
away  in  safety. 

Two  very  gorgeous  Montenegrins  by  then  arrived 
on  the  scene.  When  I  released  the  collared  boy,  and 
explained,  they  were  much  surprised  at  my  point  of 
view.  "  We  do  not  understand  these  English  ideas," 
they  said.  "  We  always  like  to  take  our  enemies  at  a 
disadvantage."  I  heard  later  that  my  action  had 
astonished  Podgoritza;  but  the  Moslems  w^ere  very 
grateful,  for  their  children  had  doubtless  been  saved 
an  awful  thrashing. 

On  June  5  came  great  news.  The  Mirdites  had 
attacked  Alessio,  and  were  said,  quite  erroneously, 
to  have  captured  guns  and  ammunition.  And  Mir- 
dita,  under  the  leadership  of  an  Italian  Albanian, 
Tochi,  had  declared  independence. 

General  Yanko  turned  up  again.  He  and  Blazho 
both  believed  the  tale.  He  reported  that  the  Turks 
had  made  no  progress  for  five  days,  and  that  the  in- 
surgents were  holding  Kapa  Brojs  splendidly.  But  the 
reports  of  the  state  of  the  refugees  was  worse  and  worse. 

I  dreaded  going  up  to  the  mountains,  as,  owing  to 
illness,  I  had  not  ridden  for  three  years.  But  on 
June  10,  in  answer  to  an  urgent  appeal,  I  decided  to 
start  for  Triepshi.  Sokol  Batzi's  son  undertook  to 
find  me  a  horse,  and  under  the  white  mulberry-trees 
I  saw  a  tall  grey  stallion,  Sokol's  own  horse,  awaiting 
me — a  beautiful  beast,  he  said ;  far  too  beautiful, 
thought  I,  for  a  middle-aged  female  who  is  com- 
pletely out  of  practice.  I  clambered  with  great  diffi- 
culty on  top  of  it;  it  waltzed  playfully  round,  and 
began  to  sidle  up  the  street.  At  that  very  moment 
came  a  telegram  from  old  Sokol  to  say  he  was  arriving. 


44  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

and  the  stallion  was  to  be  ready  for  hini.  His  son 
was  overwhelmed  with  shame  and  apologies.  An  Al- 
banian's promise  is  a  promise.  I  dismounted  joyfully, 
however,  and  went  off  happy  on  a  less  valuable  animal. 

The  Triepshi  tribe  is  Catholic  Albanian,  and  was 
annexed  by  Montenegro  after  the  war  of  1877.  But 
no  road  had  as  yet  been  made  into  the  territory.  We 
rode  up  the  mountain- side,  and  struck  a  rough  mule- 
track.  It  was  to  be  adapted  for  mountain-guns  as 
fast  as  possible.  Wretched  sheep  and  goats  were 
hobbling  on  swollen  hoofs,  and  rolling  over,  gasping 
and  dying,  on  either  side  the  way.  The  flocks  saved 
by  the  refugees  from  the  Turks  were  smitten  with 
foot-and-mouth  disease. 

Suddenly  round  a  rocky  corner  came  the  heavy 
reek  of  stale  blood  and  carbolic,  and  four  wounded, 
swaying  painfully  in  their  saddles,  passed  on  their 
way  to  Podgoritza.  A  man  with  them  shouted  there 
was  bad  news.  Almost  immediately  a  party  of  tribes- 
men and  HilMossi  (an  Albanian  patriot  and  journalist) 
came  in  sight.  The  tribesmen  were  going  for  the 
bread  ration.  Hil  Mossi  was  escorting  two  little 
Italians  who  had  run  away  from  their  home  in  Genoa 
to  help  the  insurgents,  and  had  arrived  penniless  and 
weaponless.  Their  fond  parents  traced  them,  and 
demanded  their  immediate  return  of  the  Montenegrin 
Government.  But  the  boys  were  so  disappointed 
that  they  were  taken  to  the  front,  and  allowed  to  fire 
a  few  shots  from  a  safe  place  before  returning.  They 
were  now  happy.  Not  so  Hil.  He  brought  the  news 
that  Kapa  Brojs  was  lost.  The  two  Turkish  armies 
had  met.  The  Dukagin  tribes  were  now  cut  off  from 
all  possible  food  or  arms  supply.    All  was  lost — the 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  45 

situation  desperate.  Thus  Hil,  greatly  moved.  It 
was  all  their  own  bad  management,  he  admitted.  He 
himself  had  been  fighting  there  for  days.  They  had 
been  starving,  and  had  retired  to  get  food,  believing 
themselves  unseen.  When  they  returned,  the  sum- 
mit was  occupied  by  the  Turks.  They  tried  in  vain 
to  retake  it — had  fought  all  night. 

Hil,  lean  and  brown  from  much  fighting,  with  a 
white  Albanian  cap  stuck  at  the  back  of  a  shag  of 
coal-black  hair,  was  a  picturesque  figure  enough. 
He  was,  too,  the  poet  of  the  war,  and  scribbled  verse 
in  his  pocket-book  even  under  fixe. 

We  went  our  ways.  The  Turks  now  held  the  key 
of  the  whole  situation.  Did  it  mean  war  ?  I  saw  the 
Montenegrin  military  telegraphist  putting  up  a  tele- 
phone wire  along  the  frontier. 

At  Triepshi  reigned  black  despair.  The  fatal  weak- 
ness of  the  tribal  system  was  once  more  shown.  The 
Hoti  tribesmen  had  flocked  to  the  defence  of  Seltze 
when  they  were  forced  back  from  their  tribe-land. 
But  Seltze  rudely  declared  itself  capable  of  defending 
its  own  territories,  and  bade  Hoti  mind  their  own 
business.     Nor  would  they  even  give  Hoti  bread. 

The  Hoti  men,  hungry  and  as  cross  as  a  bear  with  a 
sore  ear,  had  clambered  up  the  steep  side  of  the  valley, 
and  had  come  to  Triepshi  for  food.  One  of  their  num- 
ber had  been  drowned  crossing  the  swift  Tsem  River. 
The  death  wails  added  to  the  tragedy  of  the  situation. 

At  night  the  Turkish  watch-fires  glowed  red  on 
Kapa  Brojs,  and  next  day  rain  fell  in  torrents.  "It 
always  rains  after  a  battle,"  said  the  faithful  Albanian 
who  accompanied  me.    **  God  washes  away  the  blood." 

All  the  houses  of  Vukli  and  Boga  were  reported 


46  THE  STRUGGLE  FOE  SCUTARI 

burnt  and  looted.  A  Montenegrin,  one  of  several 
who  had  taken  part  in  the  fight,  had  been  killed. 
Albanians  and  Montenegrins  alike  were  hopeless. 

Sokol  Batzi  arrived  from  Podgoritza  on  his  grey 
stalHon,  and  summoned  a  meeting  of  headmen  in  the 
schoolroom.  Sokol  took  the  chair,  and  two  or  three 
Italian  volunteers  were  present.  The  Montenegrin 
frontier  commandant  addressed  the  roomful  of  hag- 
gard, war-worn  men.  It  was  easy  to  begin  a  thing, 
he  said,  but  hard  to  carry  it  through.  They  had 
lost  all  they  possessed  except  their  honour.  They 
were  famed  as  heroes.  The  eyes  of  Europe  were  on 
them.  They  must  act  up  to  their  reputation.  Nor 
were  they  without  friends.  He  pointed  to  the 
Italians  and  to  me,  and  enlarged  on  the  power  of  our 
respective  pens  and  rifles.  The  world  would  hear  of 
them  by  my  pen,  he  said.  I  denied  it  vainly,  and  sat 
sick  with  misery  that  such  false  hopes  should  be 
raised.  From  a  military  point  of  view,  I  felt  certain 
the  game  was  up,  and  that  no  more  lives  should  be 
vainly  sacrificed. 

The  Montenegrin  Commandant  and  Sokol,  however, 
called  on  them  to  concentrate  in  the  still  untaken 
valley  of  Seltze,  and  hold  that,  and  to  continue  the 
struggle  for  another  month.  So  it  was  decided.  The 
poor  wretches  still  hoped  for  European  intervention. 
Nothing  could  make  them  believe  that  Europe  would 
let  them  sacrifice  their  all,  in  vain. 

At  night  I  dined  with  the  Commandant  and  a  lot 
of  the  insurgents  in  the  Commandant's  quarters,  which 
were  also  the  ammunition  depot — a  great  barn  of  a 
place,  with  a  yawning  roof  of  smoke-blacked  rafters, 
from  which  the  cobwebs  hung  in  sheets.     A  fire  on 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  47 

the  ground  gave  a  flickering  ruddy  light,  and  a  dim 
lamp  showed  the  military  telegraph,  which  ticked 
incessantly.  In  the  gloom  at  the  end  stacks  and 
stacks  of  ammunition  boxes  reached  from  floor  to 
roof.  Rifles  were  piled  about.  It  was  the  main 
distribution  centre  for  cartridges.  The  insurgents 
came  every  night  for  supplies. 

We  sat  on  empty  ammunition  boxes  round  the  fire. 
A  great  many  insurgents  trailed  in.  Some,  deadly 
tired,  threw  themselves  on  the  ground,  barefoot, 
soaked  with  rain  and  half  naked,  and  slept  like  dogs. 
A  few  squatted  around  and  nursed  brand-new  Turkish 
rifles  they  had  captured  in  fight. 

HaK  a  sheep  was  stewmg  in  the  caldron  over  the 
fire.  We  sat  round  silently,  pokmg  sHvers  of  am- 
munition boxes  under  it  to  keep  up  the  blaze.  The 
door  was  shut  and  barred ;  there  was  no  ventilation  save 
the  row  of  loopholes  for  rifles.     The  air  was  stifling. 

A  Maltsor,  stripped  to  the  waist,  leaned  over  the 
pot  to  stir  it.  The  firelight  played  on  his  muscles, 
and  the  sweat  glittered  on  his  hairy  breast. 

Someone  tore  the  shoulder  ofi  the  remains  of  the 
sheep's  carcass,  spitted  it  on  the  cleaning-rod  of  a 
rifle,  and  set  it  to  roast.  We  watched  it  quite  ab- 
sorbed. Miserable  and  hopeless,  we  gave  all  our 
attention  to  trivialities  in  a  vain  attempt  to  forget 
the  loss  of  Kapa  Brojs. 

The  Montenegrin  Commandant  kept  up  a  forced 
joviality,  to  which  no  one  responded. 

Suddenly  Sokol  Batzi  swaggered  in,  brave  in  gold 
waistcoat  and  colours;  let  in  a  draught  of  cold  fresh 
air,  which  woke  the  men  up.  Hustled  up  to  me,  and 
slapped  most  of  us  on  the  back.     Extraordinarily 


48  THE  STKUGGLE  FOR  SCUTAEI 

confident,  he  inspired  confidence.  He  directed  the 
cookery.  A  Maltsor  tipped  the  soup  into  the  only 
wash-hand  basin,  beat  some  eggs  into  it,  and  set  it 
on  the  "  sofra."  "  Dark  asht  gadi "  (Supper  is 
ready).  Someone  dealt  out  wooden  ladles.  We 
fell  to.  The  men  felt  better  when  they  had  something 
inside  them.  Many  had  tasted  nothing  but  dry  bread 
for  weeks — fought  on  that  and  water  alone. 

They  sat  round  and  worried  lumps  of  seethed  mut- 
ton with  their  white  teeth,  tore  off  gobbets  from  the 
roasting  shoulder,  and  flung  them  to  me. 

As  they  were  satiated  they  lay  down  and  slept. 
I  went  out  into  the  night  and  a  fine  drizzle.  It  was 
pitch  dark,  wet,  and  steamy.  Sokol  guided  me  over 
a  wet  rough  track  to  the  school-house.  Unless  he 
knew  that  Montenegro  meant  sending  strong  rein- 
forcements, his  confidence  was  inexplicable. 

A  woman  from  the  house  opposite  came  crying  for 
bread,  one  of  a  crowd  of  half-starved,  half-naked 
refugees.    A  child  had  recently  died  of  hunger. 

There  were  then  2,140  such  miserable  beings 
in  the  immediate  neighbourhood. 

Our  horses,  stable-fed  beasts,  cropped  thin  grass 
miserably  in  the  rain.  Every  shed  and  stall,  and 
every  grain  of  corn,  was  needed  for  human  beings. 

I  visited  the  refugees  next  day  with  Father  Sebas- 
tian of  Hoti,  and  my  faithful  guide.  The  misery  was 
overpowering.  Starving  mothers  were  cooking  nettles 
and  asphodel  leaves  for  their  children,  and  mixing 
in  a  little  maize-meal  if  they  could  get  it. 

Owing  to  the  bad  organization  at  Podgoritza,  many 
had  tramped  thither  more  than  once  in  vain,  and 
returned  empty-handed.     I  dealt  out  money  to  as 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  49 

many  as  I  could,  that  they  might  not  go  fruitlessly 
next  time. 

Numbers  of  the  poor  things  recognized  me,  and, 
weeping,  said  that  I  was  their  only  hope.  It  was 
inexpressibly  painful.  Further  on  at^Korito  I  was 
told  there  were  five  hundred  families  out  on  the  bare 
mountam-side,  and  that  more  were  flocking  in. 

Unable  to  cope  with  the  situation,  I  returned  to 
Podgoritza  and  reported  it  to  Stanko  Markovitch, 
who  was  furious,  and  denied  that  any  misery  existed. 
As  I  persisted,  however,  someone  went  up  to  investi- 
gate, and  some  improvement  was  made  in  the  maize 
arrangements.  The  luckless  Albanian  schoolmaster, 
though,  who  had  given  me  first  information  of  the 
state  of  things,  was  censured. 

It  was  not  till  much  later  that  it  became  apparent 
that  land-grabbing  was  all  that  Stanko  was  intent 
upon,  and  that  the  fate  of  the  people  was  a  matter 
of  entire  indifference  to  him. 

Cattapani,  an  energetic  Italian,  who  played  a  great 
part  in  subsequent  events,  arrived,  ready  to  fight  as 
volunteer,  and  acting  at  the  same  time  as  correspon- 
dent to  the  Mattino  of  Naples.  He  offered  to  co- 
operate with  me  to  the  best  of  his  ability,  and  went 
straight  up  to  the  front. 

The  inrush  of  refugees  from  Khmenti  was  the  last 
straw.  They  were  completely  burnt  out  for  the 
most  part.  My  fund  was  all  too  small  for  the  first 
lot;  how  to  help  these  was  an  insoluble  problem.  I 
was  in  something  like  despair.  The  caves  all  along 
the  Ribnitza  River  were  cranmied  with  people.  Many 
were  widows  and  children.  Almost  all  were  without 
the  barest  necessities.     The  majority  had  not  a  change 

4 


50  THE  STEUGGLE  FOR  SCUTAKI 

of  clothing.  The  weather  grew  hotter  and  hotter; 
the  stench  was  almost  intolerable.  The  children  were 
sickening  on  a  diet  of  badly  cooked  maize.  The  days 
were  roasting.  The  heavy  blue  sky  closed  down  like 
a  lid,  and  the  land  was  white  with  dust.  The 
nights  were  sweltering.  My  room  and  all  the  hotel 
swarmed  with  blackbeetles,  which  ran  over  one  at 
night  and  drank  the  sweat,  and  laid  eggs  in  my 
clothes.  The  corridor  stank  of  orderlies.  The  night 
air  streamed  hot  through  the  open  windows;  myriads 
of  stars  stared  in  like  pitiless  eyes  from  the  cloudless 
night  sky,  and  I  hated  them. 

Just  as  the  dawn  paled.  Nature  heaved  a  sort  of  a 
sigh,  and  a  breath  of  air  came  over  the  mountains 
with  the  grey  light.  But  by  five  the  women  came 
knocking  at  the  door,  "  Kralitza,  kralitza  \"  imploring, 
praying.     Sleep  was  impossible. 

In  the  baking  hours  of  midday,  under  a  wet  towel, 
I  was  drowsing  heavily  one  day  from  sheer  exhaustion, 
when  the  usual  hammering  began  on  my  door.  ''  A 
man  wants  to  see  you."  "  Tell  him  to  go  away.'* 
A  short  pause,  then  bang,  bang,  bang !  '*  He  is  an 
Englishman.  He  says  he  wants  to  see  you  at  once.'* 
"  Tell  him  he  can't."  I  supposed  he  was  a  journalist, 
and  I  was  sick  of  them.  Bang,  bang,  bang  !  again. 
"  The  gentleman's  card,  and  he  cannot  wait."  Sleep 
was  hopeless.  I  crawled  miserably  downstairs,  and, 
under  the  white  mulberries,  found  a  tall  man,  who 
apologized  very  much  for  disturbing  me.  He  was 
Mr.  Charles  Crane,  of  Chicago. 

He  said  he  wanted  to  see  the  condition  of  the 
refugees,  and  had  been  recommended,  when  in  Con- 
stantinople, to  apply  to  me.     He  wished  to  leave 


BEFOEE  THE  WAK  51 

early  next  morning.  It  had  to  be  now  or  never.  I 
cursed  my  luck,  but  could  not  afford  to  lose  a  chance, 
however  small,  so  put  on  my  opanke  and  clambered 
with  him  from  cave  to  cave  along  the  river-bank. 
He  was  quite  imperturbable.  I  asked  if  he  had  seen 
enough.  He  said  he  had.  We  returned,  I  miserable 
at  an  exhausting  afternoon  for  nothing. 

It  is  darkest  before  the  dawn,  however.  I  had 
despaired  too  soon.  When  I  was  seeing  Mr.  Crane  off 
next  day,  he  said  he  was  sorry  he  had  not  more  to 
give  me,  and  put  a  little  bag  into  my  hand.  I  did  not 
open  it  till  I  was  back  in  my  room,  and  then  found,  to 
my  amazement,  it  contained  nearly  eighty  pounds  in 
gold.  It  was  a  miracle.  A  quantity  of  people  could 
now  be  helped;  and  as  if  in  response  to  the  influx 
of  wealth,  came  an  urgent  message  next  morning 
early,  from  Cattapani  at  Triepshi,  reporting  that  the 
misery  was  worse  than  ever,  and  begging  me  to  come 
at  once  with  various  necessities.  I  at  once  bought 
200  kilos  of  bread,  and  as  soon  as  it  was  loaded  on 
two  pack-horses,  started  to  ride  up  with  about  forty 
pounds  in  small  coin  in  my  pocket.  Arriving  late, 
there  was  time  only  to  deal  out  bread  to  the  nearest 
houses  and  turn  in. 

At  midnight  came  a  violent  knocking  on  the  school- 
house  door.  I  was  awakened  suddenly  by  cries  that 
a  telegram  had  come  by  military  wire,  and  jumped 
out  of  bed  in  alarm.  It  was  from  Mr.  Crane,  to  say 
that  he  had  paid  10,000  kronen  into  the  Bank  of 
Podgoritza  for  me. 

It  seemed  too  good  to  be  true.  I  should  not  have 
been  more  surprised  had  the  skies  opened  and  rained 
down  gold.     Nor  was  it  the  end  of  Mr.  Crane's  kind- 


52  THE  STRUGGLE  FOB  SCUTARI 

ness.  From  that  day  onward  he  sent  most  generous 
aid,  and  many  are  the  people  who  have  to  thank  hun 
for  roof,  food,  and  clothing. 

With  Cattapani  I  went  early  round  the  refugees, 
dealing  out  bread  and  money.  The  irregular  way  in 
which  the  maize  was  given  out  still  caused  much 
suffering.  The  Triepshi  people,  on  whom  they  were 
quartered,  suffered,  too,  greatly,  for  two  extra 
famihes  were  often  crowded  into  a  one-roomed  hut. 
And  the  Triepshi  folk,  bemg  Albanian,  and  in  many 
cases  related  by  marriage  to  the  refugees,  gave,  too, 
liberally  of  their  small  means  to  the  destitute. 

Cattapani  and  the  priest  of  Triepshi  described 
the  state  of  the  refugees  at  Korito  as  even  worse. 
I  planned  to  go  there  next  day.  Meanwhile,  we 
walked  to  the  frontier  and  a  little  over,  and  looked 
down  into  the  majestic  valley  of  the  Tsem,  which 
gleamed  far  below  us.  Opposite  us,  on  the  moun- 
tain-side, was  a  burning  house.  Some  insurgents 
clambered  up  to  us  and  said  the  Turks  had  overlooked 
this  one  when  burning  the  rest  of  the  valley,  and  had 
now  returned  to  it.  Turkish  tenjbs  were  visible  on 
the  high  points.  A  bullet  sang  as  it  passed  us,  and 
then  a  second.  I  remembered  a  scarlet  blouse  was 
unsuitable  when  reconnoitring  the  enemy,  and  we 
took  cover.    An  insurgent  fired  a  reply  from  below. 

Another  telegram — this  time  from  Mr.  Bourchier, 
of  TJie  Times — suimiioned  me  to  Podgoritza  at  once. 
I  borrowed  the  church  horse,  and  arrived  there  late 
in  the  evening,  very  vexed  at  having  to  give  up  going 
to  Korito  with  Cattapani.  Looking  back,  my  life 
then  seems  like  one  long  fatigue,  spurred  up  and 
hunted  about  by  telegrams  and  journalists. 


BEFORE  THE  WAE  53 

Mr.  Bourchier  informed  me  that  the  Turkish 
Government  had  denied  the  burning  of  houses. 
Tourgoud  Pasha,  on  the  other  hand,  had  recently 
boasted  to  Zoli,  the  correspondent  of  the  Secolo,  that 
it  was  being  done  by  his  orders.  I,  having  noted  in 
my  diary  several  days  when  I  had  seen  the  burning, 
wrote  a  statement  to  this  effect  for  The  Times.  It 
afforded  the  Montenegrins  the  greatest  satisfaction. 


UBA   TAMARA   ON   THE  TSEM. 


They  were  never  tired  of  denouncing  Turkish  bar- 
barism. And  in  little  over  a  year  they  were  com- 
mitting worse,  and  my  communications  then  had  a 
very  different  effect  upon  them.     But  of  this  later. 

All  Podgoritza  was  excited  at  the  news  of  Mr. 
Crane's  gift.  Both  the  bank  and  the  telegraph-office 
had  made  the  fact  public.  I  was  at  once  the  centre 
of  a  whirlpool  of  intrigue. 

Mysterious  warnings  were  brought  me  at  night. 


54  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

On  no  account  was  Stanko  Markovitch  to  touch  it. 
Ismail  Kemal,  who,  with  his  secretary,  Mr.  Gura- 
kuchi,  was  recently  arrived  at  Cettigne,  wished  to 
have  it  for  revolutionary  purposes.  I  was  told  there 
were  plots  to  terrify  me  into  giving  it  up,  and  so 
forth;  and  to  all  and  everyone  I  replied  that  it  had 
been  given  me  for  the  refugee  women  and  children, 
and  that  only  to  them  would  I  give  it.  If  the  Pod- 
goritzan  and  other  authorities  were  not  satisfied, 
they  could  say  so,  and  I  would  send  it  all  back  whence 
it  came.  The  Maltsors  were  always  on  my  side,  and 
on  this  point  I  had  no  further  trouble. 

But,  alas  !  some  foolish  mdividual  unknown,  to 
whom  to  this  day  I  owe  a  grudge,  gave  out  in  the 
European  Press  that  I  had  received  500,000  kronen, 
and  had  founded  a  hospital.  This  brought  down  a 
pack  of  letters  from  doctors,  nurses,  and  all  manner 
of  people  wanting  employment,  and,  moreover,  cut 
ofi  all  further  subscriptions.  I  had  to  send  costly 
telegrams  to  papers  of  various  countries  to  stop  the 
lie  from  circulating. 

Meanwhile  the  Albanian  leaders  were  becoming 
more  and  more  anxious  as  to  Montenegrin  intentions. 
Some  members  of  the  Albanian  Committee  came  and 
asked  me  if  I  thought  it  would  be  a  good  thing  to 
appeal  in  the  name  of  the  Albanian  people  to  the 
British  nation  as  a  lover  of  justice  and  freedom.  I 
had  not  so  much  faith  as  they  in  British  unselfishness, 
but  said  at  any  rate  it  could  do  no  harm.  A  well- 
known  foreign  correspondent  therefore  drew  up  a 
letter  for  them  in  French,  which  was  so  well  expressed 
and  moderate  that,  when  it  was  submitted  to  me,  I 
would  make  no  alteration,  and  agreed  that  it  should 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  55 

be  sent  not  only  to  Sir  Edward  Grey,  but  to  all 
the  chief  Continental  newspapers,  which  was  done. 
Briefly,  it  ran  as  follows: 

RESUME   OF  THE   LeTTER   SENT  BY  THE    IXSURGEXTS 

OF  Maltsia  e  madhe  to  Sir  Edward  Grey  and 

THE  Leading  Xewspapers  of  Europe  in  June, 

1911. 

Causes  of  Complahit. 

1.  The  unjust  manner  m  which  the  elections  are 
carried  out,  so  that  the  great  majority  in  the  Chamber 
favours  the  Osmanli  element. 

2.  The  attempt  to  suppress  our  national  language. 

3.  The  attempt  of  the  Government  to  impose 
identical  taxes  on  the  poorest  and  richest  districts. 
"  We  have  seen  the  Christians  more  highly  taxed 
than  the  Moslems,  and  the  taxes  enforced  without 
fixed  rule,  according  to  the  judgment  of  often  corrupt 
officials. 

**  4.  We  do  not  consider  disarmament  in  itself  un- 
just. But  the  soldiers  charged  with  it  tried  to  beat 
us,  and  we  have  received  no  compensation  for  the 
arms  taken  from  us. 

"  5.  None  of  the  promises  made  to  us  and  none  of 
the  hopes  we  formed  have  been  fulfilled.  Not  even  the 
most  rudimentary  public  works  have  been  begun,  and 
instead  of  opening  new  schools,  the  Government  has 
closed  our  school  at  Elbasan,  under  the  pretence  it 
was  against  religion. 

"  How,  then,  are  we  to  make  our  voices  heard  ?  We 
have  no  representative  in  Parliament.  We  have  every- 
where been  submitted  to  the  rule  of  the  sword,  for  our 
discontent  has  been  reckoned  rebellion;  nor  could  we 


i 


56  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

restrain  our  mountaineers,  exasperated  by  ill-treat- 
ment.    Insurrection  has  broken  out  in  our  unhappy 
land.     Favoured  at  first  by  Fortune,  we  showed  the 
world  that  we  acted  humanely.     We  released  all  the 
prisoners,  we  took  unharmed,  merely  disarming  them. 
Later,  when  the  Turks  gained  the  upper  hand,  we 
have  looked  on  shuddering  and  helpless  at  horrors 
which  we  know  not  how  to  describe,  but  which  the 
world  can  verify.     Our  houses  have  been  burnt,  our 
churches  bombarded,  our  lands  laid  waste,  all  we 
possessed    sacked    and    pillaged    by    the    soldiers. 
Women  and  wounded  have  been  burnt  to  death  in 
the  houses.     We  attempted  conciliation,  and  on  the 
occasion   of   the   Imperial   Jubilee  we   addressed   a 
letter  to  H.I.M.  the  Sultan,  asking  for  pity  and  jus- 
tice, and  declaring  ourselves  his  devoted  subjects; 
but  we  received  no  reply.*     We  then  continued  to 
fight,  not  with  the  hope  of  defeating  the  powerful 
Turkish  army,  but  with  the  hope  of  drawing  attention 
to  our  national  cause.     We  have  resisted  for  three 
months  troops  twenty  times  superior  to  ourselves. 
Our  brothers  in  other  districts,  disarmed  and  ex- 
hausted by  recent  oppression,  camiot-aid  us.     We  are 
now  pressed  against  the  Montenegrin  frontier,  where 
our  miserable  families  are  refuged,  camped  often  in 
holes  in  the  rocks.     Exhausted  by  the  terrible  cam- 
paign, we  address  ourselves  to  the  Western  Powers, 
in  the  name  of  our  children,  our  families,  and  our 
brethren  of  Albania,   and  beg  for  intervention  on 

*  This  is  a  fact.  For  some  reason  best  known  to  themselves 
the  officials  at  Constantinople  considered  this  quite  genuine 
letter  to  be  a  practical  joke,  and  never  even  investigated  it.  It 
was  one  of  the  many  blunders  which  ruined  the  Turkish  Empire. 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  57 

behalf  of  our  rights  as  men  and  citizens.  We  beg 
for  a  large  autonomy,  which  will  permit  us  to  be  an 
active  and  fertile  unity." 

Such  was  the  message  to  Europe.  We  anxiously 
awaited  results.  Existence  became  more  and  more 
intolerable,  and  time  seemed  to  stand  still.  A  cer- 
tain grim  humour  was  the  only  enlivenment.  I  was 
prayed  to  attend  a  funeral,  that  of  a  headman — to 
please  his  relatives — and  consented  reluctantly,  for 
a  funeral  means  too  much  rakia  and  heartrending 
death  wails.  But  at  the  last  moment  the  relatives 
sent  a  hundred  apologies  for  disappointing  me.  The 
man  was  much  better.  There  would  be  no  funeral, 
after  all ! 

The  Hotel  Europa  was  crammed  with  officers,  and 
orderlies  slept  in  heaps  in  the  corridors.  The  night 
air  reeked  of  their  sweaty  uniforms.  At  dinner  I  was 
almost  always  the  only  woman  in  a  crowd  of  officials, 
officers,  a  varied  assortment  of  correspondents  of  all 
nations,  spies,  and  Balkan  adventurers.  As  the 
weather  grew  hotter  and  hotter,  their  tempers  grew 
shorter  and  shorter,  and  blackbeetles  more  and  more 
numerous.  Sometimes  we  verged  on  war  at  the 
dinner-table.  Mr.  Bourchier,  of  The  Times,  left  to 
inspect  burnt  villages. 

"  He  is  gone,''  said  a  civilian  on  my  right  next  day. 
"  By  God  !  that  man  has  more  power  than  a  whole 
Montenegrin  battalion  \" 

"  What  \"  howled  a  young  officer  on  my  left — 
"  what !  a  foreign  man  with  a  pen  worth  more  than 
one  of  our  battalions  I  You  have  insulted  the 
army.    .    .    ."     There   followed   incoherent   torrents. 


58  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

He  leapt  up  and  went  white  with  rage.  Everyone 
yelled  and  shouted,  some  defending  one  and  some  the 
other  statement. 

I  sat  tight  between  the  two  and  grinned,  believing 
that  they  were  less  likely  to  exchange  shots  if  it  had 
to  be  done  across  me,  and  if  it  were  obvious  that  I 
thought  them  asses.  Some  elder  men  then  inter- 
vened, and  mgeniously  pomted  out  that  I,  being  Mr. 
Bourchier's  compatriot,  was  the  insulted  party.  I 
therefore  declared  honour  to  be  satisfied  by  an 
apology  finally  offered  by  the  officer  for  the  somewhat 
hasty  adjectives  he  had  strewn  about,  and  the  end 
was  peace. 

He  had  intended,  he  said,  no  offence  either  to  the 
British  Empire  or  to  Mr.  Bourchier.  His  intention 
was  merely  to  enforce  the  fact  that  no  civilian  could 
be  likened  to  the  invincible  and  incomparable 
Montenegrin  army. 

Heat,  and  waiting  for  war,  upset  most  people;  but 
we  escaped  a  duel,  though  an  Albanian  patriot 
smacked  an  Italian  who  called  him  an  Austrian  spy, 
and  an  inhabitant  of  Podgoritza  broke  the  head  of 
an  Austrian  with  a  packing-case,  or  some  such  trifle, 
for  strictly  non-political  reasons. 

While  we  swayed  thus  between  peace  and  war,  the 
Turks  on  June  20  made  a  fresh  move.  They  offered 
amnesty  for  all  insurgents  who  would  return  and  lay 
down  their  arms  within  ten  days.  These  should  all 
be  pardoned,  and  £T10,000  would  be  allotted  as 
compensation  for  the  burnt  houses.  If,  on  the  con- 
trary, the  insurgents  persisted,  they  should  be  "  pur- 
sued and  punished.''  Such  was  the  French  version 
issued  to  the  Legations  and  newspapers.     The  Al- 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  59 

banian  version,  as  posted  on  the  walls  of  Podgoritza, 
said,  "  pursued  and  annihilated/' 

The  Legations  were  somewhat  disturbed  by  this 
discrepancy.  The  insurgents  made  short  work  of 
the  notice.  It  was  posted  at  noon  and  torn  down 
within  half  an  hour.  Again  the  Montenegrins  ex- 
pressed horror  at  the  idea  of  annihilating  Albanians, 
and  posed  as  models  of  humanitarianism,  though  they 
were  in  a  short  time  to  do  what  the  Turks  merely 
threatened. 

On  the  24th  Saddreddin  Bey,  the  Turkish  Min- 
ister, arrived  from  Cettigne  to  negotiate  with  the 
Maltsors.  Sokol  Batzi  was  the  mouthpiece  of  most 
of  the  heads,  and  was  for  no  surrender.  Saddreddin 
made  various  verbal  offers — promised  to  extend  the 
armistice,  increase  the  compensation  money,  and  so 
forth — to  all  of  which  the  Maltsors,  led  by  Sokol, 
replied:  "  Where  is  the  European  guarantee  V 
That  same  evening  we  heard  artillery;  the  armistice 
did  not  count  for  much. 

Saddreddm  left  to  convey  the  answer  to  Tourgoud, 
and  the  Maltsor  heads  went  up  to  Cettigne  for  instruc- 
tions as  to  the  next  steps  to  be  taken. 

Next  day  the  Turks  sent  another  emissary,  Imail 
Hakki  Bey  (who  had  come  as  adviser  of  the  Young 
Turks  Committee  at  Scutari),  a  hooky-nosed,  tawny- 
skinned  man,  with  dark,  unclean  eyes  and  a  smug 
manner.  W^ith  him  came  Kapetan  Mark  Ghioni,  of 
the  Mirdites,  sent  by  his  cousin,  Prenk  Pasha,  the 
hereditary  chief  of  the  Mirdites.  The  Mirdites  were 
very  angry  with  Prenk  for  not  assisting  them  to  rise, 
and  Prenk  was  reported  to  be  in  a  state  of  terror. 
On  the  one  side  were  the  Young  Turks,  prepared  to 


60  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

punish  him  if  he  revolted,  and,  on  the  other,  the 
Mirdites,  threatening  to  kill  him  if  he  did  not. 
Austria  was  said  to  have  reduced  his  pay  by  half, 
and  he  was  all  for  peace.  Ibram  Effendi,  the  Mayor 
of  Scutari,  also  arrived  on  a  peace  errand.  They  called 
on  the  Maltsors  not  to  imperil  their  fatherland,  the 
Turkish  Empire.  Ibram  said  he  had  been  horrified 
by  articles  in  foreign  papers  speaking  of  its  speedy 
downfall.  But  to  all  this  the  Maltsors  refused  to 
listen,  and  continued  to  demand  a  European  guar- 
antee of  theii'  rights. 

Beppi  Shantoya,  the  son  of  my  old  dragoman  in 
Scutari,  arrived  quite  worn  out.  He  had  been  all 
the  time  in  Mirdita,  had  assisted  at  the  futile  attack 
on  Alessio,  and  had  now  come  by  night  over  the 
Shala  Mountains,  dodging  between  the  Turkish  lines. 
Soon  after  came  Tochi,  who  had  pluckily  organized 
the  Mirdites,  but  who  had  failed  for  lack  of  weapons. 
He  and  some  others  told  a  piteous  tale  of  how  day  and 
night  they  had  kept  watch  for  the  arrival  of  Riciotti 
Garibaldi's  promised  weapons  and  reinforcements  till 
they  were  sick  with  despair.  Had  they  not  relied 
on  this  help,  they  would  not  have'  risen.  If  they 
could  but  have  armed  all  the  Dukagins,  success 
would  have  been  certain.  On  the  contrary,  by 
publishing  in  the  papers  that  a  revolution  was  being 
planned.  Garibaldi,  said  the  Maltsors,  had  spoilt 
their  chances.  So  angry  were  they  that  they  execrated 
his  very  name.     Weapons   more  weapons,  was  their 

cry. 

General  Martinovitch  and  Brigadier  Boshkovitch 
and  two  Russian  officers  appeared  suddenly  one  day, 
and  went  off  to  reconnoitre  the  frontier.     So  did  an 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  61 

Austrian  journalist,  who,  on  his  return,  reported  that 
in  case  of  war  the  Montenegrins  would  not  have  a 
chance,  as  the  Turks  had  occupied  every  position  of 
importance  along  the  frontier,  and  were  extremely 
well  placed.  Together  with  the  force  of  Ehtem  Pasha, 
they  must  be  about  50,000  strong. 

Thus  the  Austrian.  What  the  Russians  thought 
I  never  knew,  but  I  always  fancied  that  it  was  in 
consequence  of  what  they  saw  that  Russia  gave 
Montenegro  no  encouragement  to  make  war.  Mean- 
while, our  "  English  letter "  had  been  favourably 
noticed  by  several  papers,  and  it  was  not  till  then 
that  the  Montenegrin  Government  knew  of  the  step 
which  had  been  taken.  The  King  was  annoyed,  for, 
as  then  became  evident,  he  did  not  wish  the  Maltsors 
to  be  anything  but  pawns  in  his  own  game.  He 
telegraphed  for  the  two  leading  Albanian  committee- 
men, and  demanded  the  full  text  of  the  letter.  As 
luck  would  have  it,  the  original  was  in  my  hands. 

A  messenger  came  to  my  room  at  midnight  and 
banged  and  hammered  on  the  door.  As  I  was 
always  being  knocked  up  at  midnight  by  silly  tele- 
grams from  newspapers,  I  flatly  refused  to  get  out  of 
bed  or  pay  any  attention  to  the  explanation  that  it 
was  urgent  Government  business,  and  the  clamouring 
messenger  withdrew;  nor  was  it  till  next  morning 
that  I  learnt  what  was  the  matter,  and  sent  off  the 
letter  in  a  huny.  I  was  told  later  that  the  King 
believed  that  I  had  instigated  the  appeal  to  the  British 
Government;  but  he  was  mistaken. 

Events  followed  fast.  On  July  4  no  less  a  person 
than  Monseigneur  Sereggi,  Archbishop  of  Scutari, 
appeared,  with  his  secretaiy,  Doni  Luigi  Bunci  (now 


62 


THE  STEUGGLE  FOE  SCUTAEI 


Bishop  of  Kalmeti),  and  most  of  the  mountain  Fran- 
ciscans and  priests.  Tourgoud  Pasha  had  sent  for 
him  to  the  camp  at  Kopliku,  and  had  there  asked 
him  to  go  straight  to  Podgoritza,  and,  as  head  of  the 
Catholics,  persuade  the  tribesmen  to  make  peace. 

"  I  replied,''  said  the  Archbishop,  telling  the  tale, 
*' that  the  Maltsors  had  already  given  their  reply; 


A  FRANCISCAN   OF  THE   MOTTNTAINS. 


that  it  was  a  question  between  them  and  the  Turkish 
Government,  and  that  three  Turkish  envoys  having 
failed,  it  was  not  likely  I  should  succeed.  All  the  while 
I  was  speaking  the  military  band  was  playing.  When 
it  stopped,  I  heard  the  '  bom,  bom '  of  artillery. 
'What  is  that?'  I  asked.  'A  little  gun  practice,' 
said  Tourgoud.  And  he  started  the  band  playing 
with  renewed  vigour,  to  hide  the  fact  that,  though 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  63 

there  is  supposed  to  be  an  armistice,  a  fight  was 
going  on  not  far  off.  He  would  not  accept  my  ex- 
cuses, said  I  was  a  Turkish  subject,  and  must  do  as 
I  was  ordered,  so  here  I  am/' 

"  Then  you  have  no  hope  of  success,  Monseigneur  V 

"  Who  am  I  to  succeed  when  so  many  have  failed  V 
said  the  Archbishop  modestly.  "  My  duties  are 
purely  spiritual,  not  political." 

And  as  I  knew  the  Archbishop  to  be  a  patriotic 
Albanian,  and  not  easily  shaken  or  frightened,  peace 
seemed  no  nearer.  He  proceeded  to  Cettigne  and 
dined  there  with  the  King,  the  Turkish  Minister,  and 
other  guests.  His  Majesty,  according  to  one  of  these 
others,  was  in  the  highest  spirits,  and  chaffed  the 
Turk  unmercifully  about  his  wives,  whereat  the  Turk 
looked  black,  and  His  Majesty  Nikola  gayer  than 
ever.  From  this  we  deduced  that  His  Majesty 
Nikola  must  have  "  somethmg  up  his  sleeve,"  and 
that  the  European  guarantee  must  be  in  sight. 

Back  came  the  Archbishop  to  Podgoritza,  and  day 
after  day  received  deputations  of  tribesmen.  The 
rank  and  file  were  so  anxious  that  no  terms  should 
be  accepted  without  European  guarantee  that  they 
declared  that  if  the  heads  made  terms  they  would 
not  submit  to  them.  They  became  very  democratic, 
and  swore  that,  as  they  had  shared  all  the  suffering, 
their  opinions,  too,  must  be  taken.  All  insisted  on 
being  heard,  and  the  proceedings  draggled  along  from 
day  to  day. 

Saddreddin  Bey,  the  Turkish  Minister,  smooth, 
plausible,  and  Oriental,  came  down  from  Cettigne  to 
receive  the  reply.     A  very  noisy  meeting  ensued. 

The  Maltsors  demanded  loudly,  "  Our  rights,  and 


64  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

a  European  guarantee/'  Saddreddin  declared  that 
the  Turkish  Government  promised  all  they  asked, 
and  that  the  Archbishop  would  stand  as  guarantee; 
whereupon  the  Maltsors,  wildly  excited,  shouted: 
"  We  accept  the  Archbishop  as  head  of  our  Church. 
We  have  the  highest  respect  for  him  as  such;  but  we 
cannot  take  him  as  a  guarantee  of  our  political  rights, 
nor  the  head  of  any  Church — not  even  the  Pope  him- 
self and  the  Sultan  together/'  Saddreddin  vainly 
tried  to  read  the  terms;  they  shouted  him  down. 
"  We  want  the  Powers  !    We  want  the  Powers  !" 

Saddreddin,  angry,  cried:  "  You  do  not  understand 
what  you  are  talking  about/' 

They  cried:  "  We  understand  very  well.  We  are 
not  children." 

He  was  laughed  down,  and  returned  to  Cettigne, 
leaving  the  tribesmen  hopeful  and  exultant.  The 
Turks'  evident  anxiety  that  they  should  make  peace, 
and  King  Nikola's  even  greater  anxiety  that  they 
should  not,  inspired  them,  poor  things !  with  the 
highest  hopes  that  their  sorrow  and  sacrifice  had  not 
been  vain,  and  that  speedy  protection  was  coming 
from  the  Powers. 

The  rakia  flowed  freely  ;  the  noise  was  deafening. 
Two  plucky  young  leaders  came  and  swore  to  me, 
their  eyes  blazing,  that  they  would  offer  up  them- 
selves to  buy  liberty  for  Albania.  They  would  creep 
right  into  the  Turkish  camp  at  Kopliku,  and  kill 
Tourgoud  in  his  tent.  They  would  themselves  be 
killed,  and  Europe  would  understand,  and  free 
Albania.  Nor  could  I  persuade  them  that  this  step 
would  in  no  way  help  matters. 

"  Well,"  said  I  to  the  Archbishop,  "  you  have  tried 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  65 

every  means — even  rakia — with  the  Maltsors,  and 
have  failed." 

"  Even  with  rakia  I  did  not  expect  to  succeed," 
said  he;  and  he  twinkled.  But  he  added  seriously: 
"  How  can  I  recommend  these,  my  people,  to  again 
trust  the  Turk  without  guarantee  ?  He  has  been 
trusted  too  often."  He  gave  a  sad  account  of  the 
want  and  misery  which  already  existed  as  a  result 
of  the  insurrection  through  all  the  mountains. 
Unless  help  came,  the  future  was  veiy  black. 

The  Maltsors  started  sniping  the  Turkish  army 
with  renewed  energy,  generally  stalking  the  small 
outposts  at  night,  and  picking  off  men  by  the  camp- 
fires.  Mehmet  Shpend,  with  his  men,  crawled  one 
night  between  two  outposts,  fired  at  first  one  and 
then  the  other,  and  started  them  firing  at  each  other, 
each  thinking  the  other  was  the  enemy.  Back  came 
Mehmet,  chuckling,  to  ask  for  more  cartridges.  War 
seemed  inevitable.  The  armistice  had  but  a  few  more 
days  to  run. 

Tourgoud  declared  to  an  interviewer  that  he  could 
no  longer  hold  his  men,  in  the  heat  and  drought,  with 
nothing  to  do,  and  nervous  with  incessant  snipmg. 
It  must  be  settled  one  way  or  the  other. 

On  July  8  I  received  a  copy  of  the  Morning  Post, 
containing  an  intenuew  with  Prince  Danilo,  who  had 
gone  to  London  for  the  Coronation,  and  (to  quote  a 
letter  I  wrote  at  the  time),  **  thougli  I  read  it  all 
alone  in  my  room,  I  shouted  with  laughter  over 
it.  I  did  not  know  he  possessed  such  inventive 
power." 

"  We  Montenegrins,"  said  His  Royal  Highness, 
"  who  most  sincerely  desire  peace  speedily  re-estalj- 

6 


66  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

listed  and  lastingly  assured,  do  all  we  can  by  giving 
both  sides  friendly  advice  ...  to  arrive  at  conclusions 
satisfactory  to  both  parties.  My  father  is  most 
anxious  ...  to  prove  to  the  Turks  the  sincerity  of  his 
desire  to  live  with  them  in  true  friendship.''  On  the 
attention  of  the  Crown  Prince  being  drawn  to  state- 
ments current  in  the  Turkish  Press,  to  the  effect  that 
"  Montenegro  is  organizmg  and  sustaining  revolt  by 
providing  the  Maltsors  with  arms  and  ammunition, 
and  by  granting  permission  to  her  subjects  to  join 
the  insurgents,'' His  Royal  Highness  said:  "I  can 
assure  you  positively  that  these  stories  have  no  foun- 
dation of  fact.  There  is,  however,  some  sort  of  justi- 
fication. .  .  .  About  100  Montenegrin  Maltsors  joined 
their  brethren  across  the  border.  .  .  .  The  Monte- 
negrin Government  immediately  ordered  their  sub- 
jects to  return  at  once  under  menace  of  severe  punish- 
ment. ...  It  is,  indeed,  quite  possible  that  some 
Maltsors  have  bought  arms  and  cartridges  from 
private  Montenegrins,  but  the  Government  had 
nothing  at  all  to  do  with  it."  "  Is  it  true  that  your 
country  is  actively  preparing  for  war  ?"  ''I  can 
assure  you  that  no  active  preparations  are  going  on." 
He  added:  "  It  grieves  my  heart  to  see  these  brave, 
uncultured  mountaineers  suffer  and  die  for  the  liberty 
of  having  their  own  schools  for  their  own  children." 
These  remarks,  when  his  stout  cousin,  Yanko,  was 
actively  engaged  in  supplying  arms,  keeping  up  the 
revolt,  and  preparing  war,  and  when  a  Montenegrin 
ofiicer  and  several  men  had  been  wounded,  were  so 
unpudent  as  to  border  on  the  sublime.  His  tender 
grief  on  the  subject  of  Albanian  schools,  when  coupled 
with  the  fact  that  such  schools  were  also  prohibited 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  67 

in  Montenegro,  was  beneath  contempt.  The  inter- 
view is  only  one  more  example  of  the  folly  of  the 
interviewing  system.  At  its  best  it  panders  to  vulgar 
curiosity;  at  its  worst  it  is  a  wholesale  disseminator 
of  lies. 

On  July  11  Cousin  Yanko  came  to  me  and  stated 
triumphantly  that  everything  was  in  readiness.  The 
artillery  track  to  Suha  finished,  and  the  guns  going 
up  that  night;  the  road  to  Rumia  also  finished,  and 
the  big  guns  going  there;  ammunition  sent  to  all  the 
frontier  posts.  He  took  war  for  granted,  and  asked 
me  if  I  would  stay  in  the  town,  or  come  into  the 
camp  with  him  as  a  correspondent.  He  added, 
laughing,  he  could  take  Scutari  in  ten  days.  The 
camp  was  under  cover  of  the  hills  close  by,  and 
artillery  drill  had  been  going  on  there  regularly  for 
some  time. 

The  armistice  was  to  expire  that  night.  Next 
morning  the  Turkish  army  might  be  over  the  border. 
It  was  but  two  miles  from  the  frontier,  and  about 
30,000  strong.  I  withdrew  most  of  my  relief  fund 
from  the  bank  in  case  of  sudden  emergency,  and  sat 
and  waited  through  what  seemed  an  endless  after- 
noon, with  the  Italian  and  Austrian  correspondents 
ready  to  fly  to  the  telegraph-office  and  wire  our  re- 
spective papers  that  war  was  declared.  All  Pod- 
goritza  palpitated  with  excitement,  and  the  minutes 
dragged  slowly  by.  At  last  came  official  news  from 
the  Turkish  Consulate  :  twenty  days'  further  armis- 
tice. The  Austrian  said  "  Damn  \"  All  his  war-kit 
was  wasted.  The  Montenegrins  said  the  Tuiks  dared 
not  fight,  as  they  knew  that,  so  soon  as  the  first  shot 
was  fired,   the  whole  of  the  Balkans  would   blaze. 


68  THE  STEUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

Bulgaria  would  begin  at  once  and  support  Monte- 
negro.   There  was  general  disappointment. 

Next  day  all  was  flat  and  the  Montenegrins  as 
cross  as  bears.  The  sudden  relaxation  of  the  strain 
of  expectancy  had  let  everyone  down  with  a  whump. 
The  insurgents  still  clung  to  hope,  as  news  of  risings 
in  Djakova  and  in  the  South  cheered  them,  and  they 
caught  at  any  straw.  The  Albanian  Committee  in 
America  telegraphed  to  me,  and  I  replied  that,  unless 
immediate  help  came,  the  cause  was  lost.  A  hodja, 
a  plucky  and  patriotic  Moslem  from  South  Albania, 
arrived  at  Podgoritza,  and  started  on  foot,  through 
the  Turkish  lines,  to  Kosovo,  to  beg  the  tribesmen 
there  to  rise  before  it  was  too  late.  We  saw  him  off 
on  his  perilous  journey  one  night. 

America  sent  money  to  pay  the  insurgents'  bread- 
bill.  They  had  fought  for  four  months  on  bread  and 
water  only,  with  the  rarest  exceptions.  The  fighting- 
men's  bread  was  not  paid  for  by  Montenegro,  though 
made  by  a  Podgoritza  baker,  from  whom  men  from 
each  tribe  fetched  it  every  few  days. 

The  hot  days  throbbed  by,  and  no  news  came, 
either  from  the  South  or  from  Kosovo.  We  grew  sick 
with  deferred  hope.  The  leaders  of  both  districts, 
more  especially  Ismail  Kemal,  failed  to  realize  that 
this  was  a  supreme  moment  for  Albania,  and  that 
now  or  never  must  her  boundaries  and  rights  be 
defined.  They  intended  to  plan  a  larger  revolution 
later  on.     I  cabled  in  vain  to  leaders  in  America. 

The  insurgents  were  furious  with  Ismail  Kemal. 
Until  he  came  to  Cettigne  he  was  quite  unknown  to 
them.  He  gave  them  no  help  at  all,  but  was  now 
said  to  be  posing,  in  the  European  Press,  as  a  leader. 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  69 

Then  came  news  of  a  lising  at  Djakova.  The 
hodja's  journey  was  succeeding.  Ehtem  Pasha  was 
wounded,  and  the  Turkish  Kainimakani  killed.  This 
spurred  the  flagging  hopes  of  the  insurgents.  They 
made  a  sudden  successful  raid,  and  cut  off  the  water- 
supply  of  Tuzi. 

Though  the  insurgents  had  still  fight  left  in  them, 
the  state  of  their  families  was  worse  and  worse. 
Quite  half  had  not  had  a  change  of  shirt  for  two 
months.  AVater  was  short,  soap  an  impossible 
luxury,  and  the  stench  sickenmg.  I  went  from  cave 
to  cave  and  shed  to  shed,  tramping  with  Martina] 
through  all  the  neighbourhood,  dealing  out  shirting 
cut  into  lengths,  needles,  and  balls  of  thi-ead.  In 
the  heat  of  midday  I  tore  and  folded  hundreds  of 
metres  of  stuff,  packed  it  and  sent  it  to  the  moun- 
tains. Money  for  relief  w^ork  was  coming  in  fairly 
well.  The  toil  of  administering  it,  however,  was  very 
severe,  for  it  was  not  large  enough  to  permit  of 
hiruig  assistants  or  of  taking  a  special  room. 

An  Italian  doctor.  Dr.  Negri,  arrived  as  a  volun- 
teer worker,  and  at  my  request  went  up  to  Triepshi 
and  did  admii-able  work  among  the  refugees,  who 
were  sickening  in  quantities  from  bad  food  and  ex- 
posure. He  sent  the  worst  cases  to  me  for  special 
help,  and  I  supplied  him  with  all  the  drugs  he  wanted. 
For  lack  of  other  accommodation,  the  wretched, 
filthy  people  swarmed  into  my  bedroom  daily. 
Though  I  removed  the  only  rug  and  drenched  the  floor 
with  carbolic,  it  was  all  of  a  hop  with  fleas;  and  at 
night  the  rank  stink  of  the  bale  of  raw  hide  for 
sandals  half  choked  me. 

So  passed  Juh .     I  lemember  it  as  a  nightmare  in 


70 


THE  STRUGGLE  FOE  SCUTARI 


an  inferno.  Peace  seemed  no  nearer.  The  Arch- 
bishop left  on  the  22nd,  and  was  seen  off  by  General 
Martinovitch  and  his  officers.  A  speech,  made  by  a 
Scutarene,  thanked  the  Archbishop  for  his  work,  and 
stated  that  no  peace  would  be  accepted  without  good 
terms  guaranteed  by  Europe.  The  Archbishop 
thanked  all  for  his  kind  reception;  he  had  failed  in 
his  errand,  and  left  the  future  in  the  hands  of  God. 
The  Podgoritzans  cried,  "  Zhivio  Kralj  Nikola !" 
(Long  live  King  Nikola  !),  and  the  Archbishop  and 
his  attendants  drove  off  in  one  of  Podgoritza's 
ramshackle  flies. 

It  was  significant  that  none  of  the  heads  of  the 
Maltsors  took  part  in  this  demonstration. 


MIRDITE    OUTPOSTS. 


CHAPTER  V 

THE    GREAT    BETRAYAL 

*'  Put  not  your  trust  in  Princes." 

That  Yanko  and  Martinovitch  and  all  their  staff  were 
delighted  with  the  way  that  the  Archbishop  had  con- 
ducted the  affair,  was  obvious.  They  did  not  wish, 
nor  did  they  intend,  to  have  peace.  Yanko  boasted 
he  would  be  in  Scutari  in  ten  days,  and  Tourgoud 
retorted  that  he  would  take  Cettigne  in  a  week. 
The  armistice  was  to  expire  on  August  1  (1911),  and 
we  counted  the  hours  and  minutes.  Military  prepara- 
tions were  pushed  on  actively,  and  the  weary  in- 
surgents were  urged  to  fresh  efforts.  In  spite  of 
Prince  Danilo's  assertions,  Montenegrin  soldiers  were 
sent  to  reinforce  them,  and  took  active  part  in  the 
sniping. 

In  the  very  last  days  of  July  some  more  riffes  were 
dealt  out,  and  a  band,  led  by  the  man  who  had  sworn 
to  kill  Tourgoud,  was  fitted  out  and  started,  with 
that  object,  on  the  last  night  of  the  armistice. 

Nothing  indicated  that  the  insurrection  would 
shortly  end.  To  our  amazement,  on  August  2,  Mr. 
Butler,  of  The  Times,  and  several  other  correspondents 
arrived  early,  and  announced  that  all  was  over,  and 
a  crisis  at  hand. 

At  noon  a  royal  motor  rushed  into  the  town  bear- 

71 


72  THE  STRUGGLE  FOE  SCUTARI 

ing  Saddreddin  Bey  (the  Turkish  Minister),  Gjukaii- 
ovitch  (then  Minister  of  the  Interior),  Dushan  Greg- 
ovitch  (Marshal  of  the  Court),  Mitar  Martinovitch 
(of  the  Artillery),  and  last,  but  by  no  means  least, 
big  Yanko. 

The  car  buzzed  in  a  cloud  of  dust  to  the  Turkish 
Consulate,  and  the  stunning  report  spread  that  peace 
was  to  be  made  at  once — not  only  peace,  but  that  the 
Turk's  terms  were  to  be  accepted  without  guarantee. 
Had  a  Turkish  shell  landed  suddenly  in  the  town,  it 
could  not  have  caused  such  astonishment,  for  it  was 
a  possibility  which  we  had  discussed  often  enough. 

Only  last  night  weapons  had  been  given  out,  and 
now — peace,  without  a  guarantee.  It  was  in- 
credible, impossible.  The  chiefs  were  summoned  at 
once.  They  met  and  squatted,  each  tribe  apart,  in 
rings  on  the  ground  near  the  schoolhouse,  to  discuss 
what  to  do.  The  news  was  a  knock-out  blow.  They 
were  stunned.  Week  after  week  they  had  obeyed 
King  Nikola's  orders;  seen  their  homes  and  goods 
plundered  and  burnt;  starved,  fought,  and  suffered; 
and  now,  in  spite  of  all  solemn  promises,  they  were 
thrown  over. 

The  Gruda  men,  with  old  Sokol  Batzi  as  President, 
sat  on  the  school  steps.  They  all  rose  as  I  ap- 
proached, as  though  I  were  a  headman,  and  gave  me 
a  seat  at  Sokol's  right  hand. 

Briefly,  the  terms  offered  by  the  Turkish  Govern- 
ment were — That  an  Albanian-speaking  Kaimmakam 
should  be  at  once  appointed  at  Tuzi,  and  that  he 
should  be  a  Christian;  that  the  right  to  carry  arms 
should  be  allowed  to  all  the  insurgent  tribes,  except 
(as  always  before)  in   the   towns   and   bazars;    that 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  73 

Albanian  schools  should  be  opened  by  the  Grovern- 
nient;  that  roads  should  be  made  in  the  mountains; 
that  money  to  rebuild  the  burnt  houses  should  be 
given;  that  maize,  sufficient  to  live  on,  should  be 
dealt  out  till  next  harv^est,  and  that  every  male  over 
fifteen  should  receive  one  pound  Turk  on  returning 
home. 

The  tribesmen  listened,  growling,  as  Sokol  de- 
tailed the  terms.  And  what  guarantee  was  offered  ? 
None  of  any  sort. 

They  blazed  up  in  a  fury.  They  had  not  suffered 
and  bled  and  lost  all  they  possessed  to  be  swindled 
thus !  Kbig  Nikola  had  promised  them  European 
support  and  fi'eedom — had  promised  never  to  desert 
them  till  they  won  it;  and  a  European  guarantee 
they  must  have. 

"  Mon  Dieu  !  ils  ont  raison/'  I  muttered  to  young 
Sokol  Batzi,  who  was  next  me. 

They  did  not  understand  the  words,  but  caught 
my  meaning,  and  said  flatly  they  would  hear  no  more 
about  terms,  and  rose. 

Muttered  wrath  came  from  the  groups  of  Hoti, 
Kastrati,  Skreli,  and  Klimenti.  Everyone  refused 
point-blank.  They  said  it  was  a  ruse  to  entrap  and 
murder  them.  Quantities  of  tribesmen  were  present, 
as  they  had  come  from  the  mountains  to  receive 
orders  at  the  close  of  the  armistice. 

At  6  p.m.  the  heads  were  summoned  to  meet  the 
Montenegrin  authorities  on  the  drill-ground  before 
the  Voyni  Stan.  The  heat  had  parched  it  to  an 
arid,  dusty  waste.  A  canvas  awning  was  hastily  put 
up  for  the  officials,  for,  even  at  6  p.m.,  it  was  still 
very  hot.     A  thick  crowd  gathered  round,  tense  with 


74  THE  STKUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

suppressed  excitement.     Yanko  and  Saddreddin  pre- 
sided. 

Saddreddin  spoke  Turkish,  which  not  a  soul  under- 
stood, and  then  called  on  Mihilaki  Effendi,  the  newly 
appointed  Kaimmakam  of  Tuzi,  to  read  the  terms  in 
Albanian.  He  did  so,  haltingly  ;  for,  with  the 
usual  Turkish  slop-dawdle,  Saddreddin  had  only  had 
them  translated  at  the  last  minute — and  then  by  a 
Greek ! 

The  crowd  appeared  to  understand  nothing, 
listened  in  silence,  and  gave  no  sign. 

Yanko  angrily  demanded  a  reply  of  old  Sokol. 
The  heads  murmured  together.  Then  Sokol  said 
they  could  give  no  answer  till  the  rest  of  the  in- 
surgents had  been  consulted.  For  months  and 
months  the  Montenegrin  Government  had  told  them 
they  must  accept  no  terms  without  a  European 
guarantee.     Now  they  did  not  understand. 

Yanko  refused  to  take  this  as  an  answer.  He  was 
obviously  losing  his  temper  rapidly.  So  certain, 
indeed,  had  the  Montenegrin  Government  been  that 
the  Press  agents  in  Cettigne  had  already  telegraphed 
to  the  papers  that  the  insurgents  had  at  once  obeyed 
King  Nikola.     And  here  they  were,  resisting  to  a  man. 

Sokol,  much  agitated,  asked  if  he  and  some  of  the 
heads  might  go  to  the  Turkish  Consulate  and  talk 
things  over  with  the  authorities. 

Yanko  accepted.  The  crowd  moved  across  the 
plain  to  the  Consulate,  murmuring,  but  quite  orderly. 
Only  at  the  door  of  the  Consulate,  when  Sokol  Batzi, 
Dod  Prenchi  of  Kastrati,  and  old  Ded  Jon  Luli  of 
Hoti,  passed  in,  they  cried  loudly,  "  Do  not  betray 
us,  do  not  betray  us  \"  and  for  a  moment  seemed 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  75 

about  to  lose  control,  but  restrained  themselves,  and 
walked  quietly  away,  and  again  held  meetings. 

Poor  people  !  Tlieii-  indignation  and  distress  were 
painful  to  behold.  I  have  never  witnessed  a  more 
poignant  scene.  They  repeated  again  and  again  that 
Montenegro  had  promised  to  stand  by  them  till  a 
guarantee  was  obtained.  The  King  hunself  had  so 
sworn  to  many;  had  promised  to  assist  them  with 
troops,  if  need  was.  They  implored  me  to  inform 
England,  to  protest  against  this  treachery,  to  save 
them.  It  was  painful  in  the  extreme.  1  went  back 
late  to  the  hotel,  tired  out. 

Gregovitch  captured  me  at  once.  "  You  are  the 
only  person  who  knows  their  minds.  Are  they  going 
to  yield?" 

"No,"  said  I.  "  And  I  do  not  see  how  you  can 
expect  it,  after  all  you  have  said  and  done." 

He  seemed  very  much  upset,  and  said :  "  They  will 
have  to.  The  maize-supply  is  to  be  cut  off  the  day 
after  to-morrow." 

I  expressed  great  disgust  at  the  cruelty  of  this,  as 
even  if  they  yielded,  it  would  be  impossible  for  so 
many  to  return  in  so  short  a  tune.  He  was  angry. 
We  said  no  more. 

An  American  correspondent  came  and  suggested 
that  I  should  act  as  mtermediary,  and  urge  the  tribes- 
men to  accept  the  terms;  but  I,  knowing,  better  than 
he,  that  up  till  now  the  Montenegrins  had  done  all 
they  could  to  prolong  the  struggle,  refused  to  now 
play  Montenegro's  game  for  her.  Next  day  a  scare 
was  spread  that  there  was  an  outbreak  of  cholera, 
and  this  was  used  to  get  up  a  panic  against  the 
further  presence  of  the  luckless  refugees. 


76  THE  STEUGGLE  FOE  SCUTAEI 

The  Montenegrins  were  furious  at  the  disobedience 
of  the  Maltsors.  The  Maltsors  were  even  more 
furious  at  the  Montenegrins'  treachery.  With  so 
many  thousand  armed  men,  all  infuriated  and 
further  excited  by  the  extreme  heat,  the  situation 
was  hourly  more  dangerous. 

Wearied  out  and  anxious  beyond  all  words,  I 
kept  out  of  sight,  that  my  opinion  might  not  be 
asked,  and  spent  most  of  the  day  behind  a  haystack 
with  Kol  Martina],  discussimg  the  hopeless  situation, 
cursing  Montenegro  and  all  the  Powers,  and  devising 
impossible  schemes. 

A  blood-red  sunset,  that  seemed  all  too  appropriate, 
darkened  into  night  before  we  returned  to  the  hotel 
for  supper.  We  ate  alone  and  in  silence.  In  came 
Yanko,  red-faced  and  much  agitated,  shut  the  door 
after  him,  and  said:  "You  must  listen  to  me,  you 
two.  I  unplore  you  in  God's  name  to  act,  and  act 
at  once."  Kol  and  I  stared  amazement  at  one 
another.  I  replied  to  the  effect  that  this  was  the 
Montenegrin  Government's  own  affair,  not  mine; 
that  there  was  much  that  I  did  not  understand — 
broken  promises  and  so  forth — and  I  therefore 
could  not  act. 

Yanko  blustered,  seemed  distrustful,  finally  sat 
down  heavily,  and  expounded  the  whole  situation. 
Things  had  all  gone  wrong.  He  had  been  all  for 
war.  The  right  moment  had  been  lost  ;  the  Turks 
had  taken  all  the  positions.  Those  fools  of  Maltsors 
had  begun  too  soon !  With  all  the  eyes  of  Europe 
attracted,  what  could  one  do  ?  The  Powers  now 
insisted  on  peace:  if  Montenegro  disobeyed,  she  was 
lost.     The  Maltsors  must  be  sent  back  somehow — 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  77 

he  and  all  tlie  Montenegrin  authorities  hacl  failed  to 
persuade  them 

I  wondered  how  often  in  history  a  foreign  female 
had  been  asked  by  a  Commander-in-Chief,  who  was 
also  a  Queen's  cousin,  in  the  name  of  God  and  his 
Government  to  make  terms  for  him  with  insurgents 
he  had  himself  incited.  Yanko,  Martinaj,  and  I 
argued  up  and  down  for  two  hours. 

The  tension  was  extreme.  Yanko  stooped  to 
threats.  If  the  insurgents  did  not  at  once  obey,  all 
those  who  were  within  the  Montenegrin  frontier  (and 
almost  all  had  come  in  for  the  parley)  would  be 
forcibly  disarmed.  This  would  mean  bloodshed  un- 
doubtedly. 

All  food-supplies  would  be  cut  off  at  once.  They 
would  be  star^'ed  out  and  forced  to  go  defenceless, 
and  crave  pardon  and  bread  of  the  Turk  on  their 
knees.  Turks  were  Turks.  Who  knew  what  might 
result  ? 

And  if  they  consented  to  go,  wliere  were  the 
guarantees  for  safety  ?  If  they  consented  to  go  at 
once  and  quietly,  Montenegro  would  see  that  they 
went  with  6,000  rifles  and  a  supply  of  cartridges  for 
each  man.  This  in  itself  was  a  guarantee  of  safety. 
If  we  needed  more  guarantee — well,  the  terms  had 
been  submitted  to  every  Legation.  The  Turks  must 
fulfil  them. 

It  was  midnight.  I  was  exhausted.  There  was 
no  other  possible  course,  so,  believing  rather  in  the 
6,000  rifles  than  the  Powers,  Martinaj  and  I  con- 
sented to  do  what  we  could. 

I  rose  to  go.  But,  no — the  co-operation  of  the 
mountain  priests  had  to  be  secured.  Father  Sebastian 


78  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

and  Father  Matteus  and  one  or  two  others  were 
hastily  summoned.  They,  too,  as  patriotic  Albanians, 
were  reluctant  to  act.  The  tale  began  again.  At 
1  a.m.,  reeling  with  fatigue,  I  got  up  to  go.  Yanko 
stopped  me  with,  "  You  must  begin  early  to-morrow. 
Be  ready  at  four  \" 

The  night-air  outside  was  as  suffocating  as  the 
room.  I  sweltered,  sleepless  with  the  responsibility 
I  had  taken.  Whichever  I  advised,  resistance  or 
obedience,  I  might  have  the  blood  of  these  people 
on  my  conscience,  and  I  had  no  help  to  turn  to.  I 
had  written  to  editors  and  diplomatists  often  enough 
to  know  that  it  would  be  useless;  and  there  was  no 
time  to  lose.  Sick  with  sleeplessness  and  disgust  at 
the  way  in  which  Montenegro  had  made  a  cat's-paw 
of  the  Maltsors,  and  then,  having  failed  to  extract 
chestnuts,  cast  them  back  to  the  enemy,  I  came  down 
into  the  yard  at  six  in  the  morning,  and  found  poor 
old  Marash  Hutzi,  the  old  doctor  man  of  Hoti,  await- 
ing me.  A  brave  and  very  honest  old  man,  he  had 
told  me  often  in  the  course  of  the  insurrection  that 
he  did  not  mind  the  suffering  if  God  .would  let  him 
see  freedom  before  he  died.  That  the  Powers  would 
cast  them  back  after  this  terrible  struggle,  that 
Montenegro  had  given  them  up,  dazed  and  stunned 
him.  He  could  no  longer  think,  he  said;  he  had 
come  to  me  for  advice.  I  told  him  there  was  only 
one  way — to  yield  and  go  back.  He  answered  that 
he  and  all  his  family  would  obey.  They  would 
accept  my  word,  and  none  other's.  He  cheered  up, 
for  he  had  shifted  the  responsibility  on  to  me.  We 
went  into  the  dining-room,  where  Yanko,  Blazho, 
and    some   other   officers   were    waiting   nervously. 


BEFORE  THE  WAE  79 

They  were  intensely  relieved  to  see  an  influential 
headman,  and  begged  me  to  hurry  up. 

Martina]  and  the  Franciscans  came.  They  too 
agreed  that  nothing  else  could  be  done,  and  our  duty 
was  to  save  bloodshed. 

Already  at  that  early  hour  the  sun  was  blazing. 
The  drill-ground  by  the  Voyni  Stan  was  deep  with 
dust.  Martina]  and  I  went  from  one  group  of 
desperate  and  fiercely  indignant  men  to  another,  and 
plunged  into  the  thick  of  them,  I  speaking,  he  trans- 
lating, arguing,  entreating,  commanding.  The  air 
was  foggy  with  dust,  and  stank  with  sweat. 

The  men  yelled  and  shouted.  They  had  been  be- 
trayed; they  would  have  justice;  they  would  never 
go  back;  they  would  prefer  to  fight  and  die  here. 
The  King  had  promised  a  European  guarantee. 
They  must  have  one. 

Yanko  rushed  suddenly  from  the  Voyni  Stan,  and 
said  he  must  have  an  answer  by  noon.  I  said  he 
could  not;  that  he  must  give  us  till  the  afternoon, 
and  go  away  at  once.  I  seized  his  arm  and  tried  to 
shake  him,  and  sent  him  off. 

Neither  the  Franciscans  nor  Martina]  and  I  were 
making  any  headway.  The  Klimenti  men  in  especial 
were  furious.  They  said:  "You  are  going  back  to 
your  country,  where  you  will  be  safe,  and  you  order 
our  women  back  to  be  violated  by  the  Turks.  You 
would  not  go  back  to  Albania  for  the  winter  your- 
self.'' 

There  was  nothing  left  for  it  but  to  promise  to  go 
with  them.  I  promised.  Even  this  influenced  only 
a  few. 

At  middav,  exhausted  and   hoarse,  we  gave  up. 


80  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

The  Montenegrins  were  furious.  I  feared  the  worst. 
But  by  the  afternoon  the  tribesmen  had  had  time  to 
consider  the  terms.  Martinaj  and  the  Franciscans 
once  more  addressed  them,  and  at  four  o'clock,  re- 
luctantly and  sorrowfully,  they  consented. 

Yanko,  intensely  relieved,  made  a  speech,  in  which 
he  hoped  that  they  would  have  all  their  national 
rights,  and  that  Martinaj  should  be  Professor  among 
them  in  an  Albanian  school. 

Blazho  and  Yanko  and  General  Martinovitch 
thanked  me  on  behalf  of  the  Government  for  my 
services,  and  my  promise  to  accompany  the  Maltsors. 
But  the  iron  was  to  be  struck  while  hot.  Carriages 
were  ordered,  and  some  twenty  headmen,  including 
Mirash  Lutzi,  drove  off  to  Tuzi,  fully  armed.  An 
excited  crowd  saw  them  off. 

The  fateful  day  was  over.  There  was  no  going 
back  from  the  step  we  had  taken.  The  reaction  was 
horrible.  Martinaj  turned  white.  We  were  both 
overwhelmed  with  the  responsibility  we  had  taken, 
and  could  barely  be  civil  m  reply  to  the  fulsome 
thanks  of  Yanko,  Blazho,  and  Martinovitch. 

The  Klimenti  men  sent  me  a  message  that  they 
went  back  entirely  on  my  responsibility,  and  that 
if  aught  happened  to  them,  their  blood  was  upon  my 
soul. 

It  kept  me  awake  all  night,  and  at  3.30  a.m.  I  had 
to  get  up  and  crawl  down  the  street  to  meet  Mr. 
Butler,  of  The  Times,  and  Mr.  Leland  Buxton,  of  the 
Macedonian  Relief  Committee,  in  order  to  fulfil  my 
promise  of  crossing  the  frontier. 

In  the  grey  dawn  we  drove  over  the  plam  to  Tuzi, 
where  Mihilaki  Eff  endi,  the  new  Kaimmakam,  received 


■•-t 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  81 

us  very  affably.  I  confess  that  at  the  time  I  dis- 
trusted his  promises,  as  I  regarded  him  only  as  a  tool 
of  Saddreddin  Bey  (a  man  for  whom  I  had  great  con- 
tempt); but  he  turned  out  to  be  a  good  man.  I 
found  the  returned  insurgents  in  good  spirits.  Poor 
old  Mirash  Lutzi  looked  ten  years  younger.  It  had 
nideed  been  plucky  of  him  to  be  among  the  first  to 
return,  for  he  quite  expected  to  be  betrayed.  Mihilaki 
had  treated  the  first  twenty  with  great  hospitality- 
mutton,  coftee,  and  suchlike  delicacies  galore. 

Mirash's  one  anxiety  was  for  his  son.  He  called 
me  aside,  and  prayed  me  on  my  return  to  go  straight 
to  Yanko,  or  Martinovitch,  or  whomever  was  in  com- 
mand, and  beg  him  at  once  to  warn  the  band  they 
had  sent  out  a  few  days  before,  that  peace  had  been 
made.  "  If  they  are  not  recalled  at  once,"  he  said, 
"  they  will  throw  their  bomb  into  Tourgoud's  tent,' 
and  we  shall  all  be  executed  in  revenge.''  He  cursed 
the  Montenegrin  Generals  freely  for  having  thus 
equipped  and  sent  a  band  at  the  last  moment.  Nor 
was  his  anxiety  uncalled  for. 

Returning  to  Podgoritza  at  noon,  I  gave  Mirash's 
message  at  once  to  Yanko,  and  was  told  they  had 
ahready  sent  to  warn  the  band.  The  insurrection 
was  over.  The  toil  and  strain  of  the  past  four 
months  had  been  vain. 

^  I  had  hoped  up  till  the  last  that  some  sort  of 
European  protection  would  have  been  obtained,  for 
that  would  have  entailed  at  any  rate  a  rough'  de- 
limitation of  Albanian  territoiy ;  and  if  that  had  been 
done,  what  horrors  would  have  been  later  spared  ! 
But  a  ring  had  been  formed  by  the  Press  of  Europe  : 
The  Young  Turk  was  sacred.    As  someone  remarked, 

6 


82  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

"  A  Turk  has  merely  to  say  he  is  Young,  and  he 
may  do  what  he  pleases."  Europe  pursued  the  fatal 
policy  of  non-intervention.  It  seemed  as  though  we 
were  all  swept  along  into  the  cogs  of  a  vast  machine 
that  turned  and  turned  ceaselessly  and  pitilessly. 

With  brutal  haste,  men,  women,  and  children  were 
hunted  back  across  the  border  like  so  much  cattle. 
I  made  a  struggle  to  serve  out  as  many  garments  as 
tune  allowed;  but  I  was  quite  done  up  with  the  heat, 
which  rose  to  104°  F.  in  the  shade,  as  well  as  with 
the  work,  and  an  attack  of  lumbago  and  rheumatism 
struck  me  helpless.     I  lay  on  my  bed,  and  the  refugees 
came  in  all  day  for  doles  to  help  them  to  return  to 
their  rumed  homes  by  hiring  a  cart  or  horse  to  carry 
the  children  and  such  goods  as  they  possessed,  and 
especially  to  beg  for  opanke  (sandals)  for  the  long 
tramp  to  the  mountains.    Martinaj  sat  by  me  and 
dealt  out  as  I  directed;  and  from  my  room  such  men 
as  had  no  weapons  went  to  the  Montenegrins  for  the 
promised  rifles.    All  other  foreigners  were  ordered 
out  of  the  town,  lest  they  should  incite  the  Maltsors 
to  further  resistance.     Then  Martinaj  was  telegraphed 
for  to  return  to  his  work  in  Italy,'  and  I  was  left  all 
alone  to  help  of  the  last  of  the  insurgents  as  best  I 

could. 

When  I  recovered  enough  to  be  able  to  crawl 
downstairs,  Podgoritza  was  a  blank.  Soldiers, 
officers,  insurgents,  correspondents  —  all  had  dis- 
appeared like  a  dream;  or  was  the  present  cahn  but 
a  dream— the  hush  before  the  storm  ?  For  one  who 
was  in  touch  with  the  King  had  told  me,  under  promise 
of  strict  secrecy  (nothing  was  to  be  published  before 
next  May),  that  the  withdrawal  of  the  Maltsors  was 


BEFORE  THE  WAR  83 

only  a  ruse  in  order  to  bring  about  the  withdrawal 
of  the  Turkish  troops;  that  so  soon  as  this  was  effected, 
the  lost  strategical  positions  would  be  reoccupied.  If, 
as  was  hoped,  this  withdrawal  took  place  shortly,  it 
was  possible  that  fighting  would  begin  in  the  winter. 
If  not — why,  in  April  for  certain.  And  I  was  pledged 
to  winter  in  Albania. 


PART    II 

THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS 


CHAPTER  VI 

THE   WINTER    OF   OUR   DISCONTENT    (1911-1912) 

To  give  even  an  idea  of  the  ceaseless  strain,  the 
anxious  waiting  from  hour  to  hour,  as  we  drew  nearer 
and  nearer  to  an  unfathomable  precipice,  seems  to 
me  an  almost  impossible  task.  It  was  an  endless 
winter  of  toil,  misery,  rumours,  alarms,  deaths — 
all  in  an  indescribable  tangle  of  intrigue,  plot,  and 
counterplot. 

Only  firm  and  prompt  action  on  the  part  of  the 
so-called  Great  Powers  could  have  prevented  the 
final  catastrophe.  But  it  daily  became  more  and 
more  obvious  that  the  Powers  would  rather  that  the 
whole  Balkan  population  died  than  that  they  should 
stretch  a  finger  to  save  them. 

**  It  would  be  an  awful  thing,"  they  said,  "  if  our 
little  hands  should  tear  each  other's  eyes.'' 

Nor,  so  it  seems,  did  they  see  any  alternative  plan. 
"  Hawks  do  not  pluck  out  hawks'  een  "  is  a  fair 
saymg.  But  the  Powers  are  naught  but  a  menagerie, 
with  nothing  liker  a  hawk  than  a  spatch-cocked  eagle 
or  two.  And  so  soon  as  the  door  is  opened,  they 
believe  they  must  do  as  other  menageries — tooth  and 
nail. 

87 


88  THE  STEUGGLE  FOE  SCUTAEI 

In  all  the  world  there  is  nothing  more  pathetic 
than  the  belief — in  spite  of  all  evidence  to  the  con- 
trary— that  the  little  peoples  have  in  the  greatness 
and  goodness  of  the  "  Powers/'  And  nothing  more 
despicable  than  the  Powers  as  they  really  are. 

But  for  international  jealousies  of  the  meanest  kind, 
an  international  gendarmerie  could  have  controlled 
the  affairs  of  European  Turkey,  and  by  preventing 
the  hideous  series  of  outrage  and  reprisals  that  took 
place  throughout  Macedonia  and  in  parts  of  Albania, 
as  the  Young  Turk  strove  madly  by  every  species  of 
cruelty  to  forcibly  Ottomanize  his  subject  peoples — 
might  have  prevented,  or  at  least  have  mitigated,  the 
wholesale  slaughter  that  was  shortly  to  follow. 

Crueller  and  more  calculating  than  the  Turk,  the 
rulers  of  the  Balkan  States  deliberately  and  in 
cold  blood  incited  resistance,  stirred  up  rebellion. 
For  the  aim  and  hope  of  each  was  to  advertise 
his  cause  upon  a  poster  bloody  enough  to  justify 
war. 

"  We  had  expected  quite  half  the  population  to  die 
as  the  result  of  this  insurrection,''  said  the  Bulgar 
Bishop  of  Ochrida  and  his  secretary  to  me  in  1904, 
"  and  not  one  quarter  have.  Next  time  a  great 
many  more  must  die,  and  Europe  will  have  to  listen 
to  us." 

So  things  danced  in  a  bloody  circle,  each  Balkan 
ruler  striving  "  to  free  "  the  land  at  the  expense  of 
the  hapless  peasants  he  pretended  to  "  liberate," 
who,  in  fact,  were  so  many  "  research  guinea-pigs," 
with  whom  he  experimented  against  the  Turks,  and 
anyone  else  likely  to  thwart  his  schemes  of  aggrandize- 
ment.   And  behind  each  petty  ruler  sat  a  Great  Power 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS     89 

with  "  a  sphere  of  influence  "  in  view,  and  restrained 

or  egged  him  on  according  as  it  suited  a  yet  larger 

game. 

H«  *  *  *  * 

It  was  on  August  19  that  I  arrived  once  more  in 
Scutari,  ill  and  tired  enough,  burdened  with  my 
promise  to  help  the  returned  insurgents,  and  with 
the  knowledge  that  unless  the  Powers  took  immediate 
and  concerted  action,  more  bloodshed  was  inevitable. 

Russia,  by  cutting  of!  Montenegro's  supply  of 
pocket-money,  had,  in  fact,  stopped  immediate  action. 
But  this  was  a  mere  lull. 

Various  reasons  made  it  more  desirable  to  stay  in 
the  hotel  than  in  a  private  house,  and  I  had  hardly 
settled  in,  when  the  Maltsors  began  coming  for  help 
and  advice.  Beyond  imploring  them  to  be  patient, 
I  could  do  little  for  them  till  I  had  been  a  fortnight 
in  the  doctor's  hands. 

The  new  Vali,  an  old  Moslem  Bulgar,  was  very 
friendly,  and  gave  me  full  permission  to  help  the 
burnt-out  tribesmen.  He  would  be  glad,  he  said,  of 
anything  that  would  content  them.  The  Turkish 
authorities,  in  fact,  were  not  sorry  that  England 
should  be  a  counter-attraction  to  various  other 
Powers. 

The  position  of  things  was  as  bad  as  it  well  could 
be.  The  Turkish  officers  and  all  the  Young  Turk 
representatives  were  furious  about  the  concessions 
made  to  the  msurgents.  Intense  bitterness,  too, 
prevailed  between  the  town  Moslems  and  the  late 
insurgents,  who  had  beaten  them  at  Kopliku,  and 
this  bitterness  was  foolishly  fostered  by  the  Young 
Turk  enthusiasts. 


90  THE  STEUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

Before  the  month  was  up  came  the  first  row.  Six 
Kastrati  men  were  set  on  and  severely  mauled  by  a 
gang  of  town  Moslems,  who  were  enraged  by  seeing 
that  the  Kastrati  had  Montenegrin  rifles.  The  six 
Christians  were  promptly  arrested,  and  the  Moslems 
let  off. 

All  the  fat  was  in  the  fire  at  once.  Hakki  Bey,  the 
Young  Turk  representative,  said  he  was  glad  the 
Christians  had  been  thrashed ;  it  would  do  them  good. 
To  add  to  the  difficulties,  Ramazan  was  beginning, 
and  in  Ramazan  Moslems  are  apt  for  quarrel. 

The  Archbishop  protested  —  said  the  promised 
maize  was  being  given  irregularly;  that  the  promised 
compensation  money  had  not  been  paid  ;  and  that  if 
violence  were  offered  to  the  tribesmen,  he  could  not 
be  responsible  for  consequences. 

The  Kastrati  men  were  liberated,  but  the  Moslems 
were  not  punished.  The  tribesmen  were  defiant,  and 
clamoured  for  their  money. 

I,  who  had  promised  to  go  to  the  mountains  and 
investigate  the  state  of  things  there,  was  too  ill  to  go, 
and  was  in  something  like  despair  when  Mr.  Nevinson 
arrived,  sent  by  the  Macedonia  Relief  Committee,  to 
act  as  their  agent.  He  relieved  me  of  the  job  and 
started  off  to  visit  the  burnt-out  districts.  I  went 
with  him,  so  far  as  it  was  possible  to  drive  in  a 
carriage,  to  Baitza  in  Lower  Kastrati,  and  there 
visited  some  twenty  ruined  homes,  all  burnt,  not  a 
roof  anjrwhere.  The  people  were  squatting  under 
little  sheds  of  rushes  and  boughs,  and  had  collected 
and  used  every  unbroken  roof-tile. 

There  are  few  sights  more  heart-rending  than  burnt 
homes.     The  floor,  lighted  from  below,  flares  up  and 


I 


THE  GATHEETXG  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS     91 

burns  the  roof  rafters  and  all  the  props  within. 
Down  comes  the  roof  with  a  crash,  and  the  red  sparks 
shoot  up.  Part  of  the  stone  wall  is  torn  down  by  the 
falling  timbers.  Blackened  ruins  are  all  that  remain, 
and  among  them  cower  the  innocent  victims  who  have 
wandered  back,  destitute  of  nearly  all  but  the  clothes 
they  wear.  And  Europe  says:  "  Thank  God  !  Peace 
has  been  preser\^ed.  We  have  not  fought  each  other." 
What  God  is  it  that  they  thank  ?     Moloch  ? 

The  courage  with  which  some  of  the  returned  refu- 
gees faced  their  misery  was  admirable.  One  plucky 
old  woman  who  had  succeeded  in  saving  the  parts  of 
her  loom  had  put  it  up,  and  was  hard  at  work  weaving 
stufE  for  the  children's  clothes  from  w^ool  she  had  spun 
during  the  insurrection. 

In  the  church  the  Turks  had  decapitated  the 
images  of  the  saints  and  poked  out  the  eyes  of  the 
pictures.  One  of  the  most  inexplicable  of  the  many 
weaknesses  that  afflict  mankind  from  Turks  to 
Kensits  is  the  extraordinar}^  hatred  which  folk  bear 
for  the  S}Tnbols  of  any  brand  of  religion  but  their  own, 
and  the  blind  fury  with  which  they  attack  inanimate 
objects.  It  is  the  one  point  which  many  very  dis- 
similar religions  have  in  common. 

The  devastation  of  Baitza  was  a  fair  sample  of  the 
rest  of  the  Turks'  work. 

Mr.  Neviuson  returned  after  a  week's  tour  thi-ough 
the  mountains,  and  reported  that  the  greater  part  of 
the  houses  of  the  Klimenti — almost  all  in  Hoti — 
the  Christian  houses  in  Skreli,  and  nearly  all  in  Ka-s- 
trati,  were  burnt,  and  the  few  not  burnt  pillaged; 
two  churches  and  several  chapels  completely  de- 
stroyed, and  all  the  churches  plundered.     In  Gruda, 


92  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

only  a  hundred  houses  were  burnt,  but  ahnost  all 
were  pillaged.  The  Moslems  in  some  instances  had 
suffered  as  badly  as  the  Chiistians. 

Briefly,  the  net  result  of  the  Young  Turks'  policy 
of  forcible  Ottomanization  was,  that  in  order  to 
enforce  taxation,  they  had  destroyed  about  2,000 
houses,  and  rendered  the  land  unable  to  pay  any  tax 
for  years  to  come ;  that  they  had  been  forced  to  yield 
on  the  point  of  language  and  on  the  right  to  carry 
arms;  and  that  they  had  alienated  the  sympathies  of 
almost  all  the  Albanian  race. 

To  achieve  this  end,  they  had  spent  many  millions 
which,  had  they  been  devoted  to  the  much-needed 
pubHc  works,  might  have  brought  peace  and  pros- 
perity to  the  land,  and  had  sacrificed  something  like 
8,000  soldiers,  reckoning  killed,  wounded,  and  those 
which  died  of  disease.  Many  troops  had  already  left 
Albania,  but  among  those  camped  near  Scutari  and 
Medua,  a  species  of  cholera  was  reported  to  be  still 
causing  many  deaths. 

The  Young  Turks,  in  their  struggle  for  supremacy, 
had  lost  much.  The  Maltsori,  fighting  for  freedom, 
had  lost  nearly  all  they  possessed. 

The  Turkish  Government  had  by  now  paid  the 
£1  per  head  promised  to  each  male  over  fifteen  on 
returning,  and  the  maize  distribution  had  begun. 
But  roofing  and  clothing  were  urgently  required. 
As  all  traffic  had  been,  and  was  still,  blocked  by 
military  stores,  there  was  scarcity  of  material  in  the 
town,  and  importation  was  difiicult.  We  bought  up 
all  the  thin  planks  in  the  town,  and  ordered  tarred 
felt  from  Trieste. 

One  district,  the  tribe  of  Summa,  remained  un- 


RKTCKNKI)    kF,Il(.Kl>    AT    I^AITZA,    SKI'TEM  KI.K,     I9II. 


I\S'<i  KN  I     \  n    I  IM- 


THE  GATHEEING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS     93 

visited.  AVe  started  there  on  horseback  to  inspect. 
It  was  September  24,  a  golden  autumn  day,  glorious 
with  brown  bracken,  scarlet  berries,  and  crimson  and 
yellow  foliage.  Before  us,  all  blue  and  mysterious, 
lay  the  Kiri  Valley.  It  was  with  extraordinary  joy 
that  I,  once  more  after  three  years'  absence,  rode 
into  the  mountains,  past  Drishti,  which  was  then  a 
bower  of  silver  olives,  up  the  slopes  of  Maranaj,  and 
over  his  shoulder.  Far  below  lay  Scutari  Lake,  in- 
comparably beautiful.  But  the  turf,  as  we  began  to 
descend  on  the  farther  side,  was  ringed  with  the  marks 
of  Turkish  tents,  and  the  remains  of  a  pack  of  playing- 
cards  were  bleaching  in  the  sun,  left,  perhaps,  by 
some  "  advanced  "  officer;  for  it  is  a  common  saying: 
"  He  is  a  Moslem,  but  almost  a  Christian:  he  drinks 
and  gambles." 

The  track  was  very  bad.  We  lost  it  more  than  once, 
and  it  was  only  after  nearly  ten  hours  of  ridmg  and 
scrambling  we  arrived  in  the  dusk  at  the  miserable 
house  of  the  priest  of  Summa.  It  had  been  com- 
pletely pillaged.  Save  that  he  had  a  roof,  he  was 
little  better  off  than  the  poorest  of  his  parishioners, 
and  he  gladly  shared  the  food  we  had  brought. 

The  Summa  tribe  had  made  a  futile  little  rising, 
had  failed  to  reach  the  other  insurgents,  been  sur- 
rounded by  troops  who  burnt  thirty-five  houses,  of 
which  twelve  were  Moslem,  and  plundered  many  of 
the  others.  As  the  wTetched  people  had  not  suc- 
ceeded in  reaching  Montenegro,  they  were  not  con- 
sidered by  the  Turkish  Government  as  entitled  to 
the  corn  ration. 

Summa  was  always  poor;  it  was  now  in  abject 
misery.    We  found  the  luckless  creatures  half-naked 


94  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

among  the  ruins,  the  women  boiling  chopped  grass 
and  nettles  to  feed  the  children,  who  shivered  in 
the  chill  autumn  morning  in  the  ragged  remains  of 
shirts. 

Food  was  obviously  the  first  necessity  here.  We 
gladdened  them  by  the  ofi'er  of  six  loads  (a  load  is 
about  250  pounds)  of  maize  if  they  would  fetch  it 
themselves.  I  fed  them  at  intervals  all  through  the 
winter. 

We  returned  to  Scutari,  to  find  wild  rumours  that 
Italy  was  picking  a  quarrel  with  the  Turks  about 
Tripoli,  but  as  there  was  no  mention  at  all  of  the 
subject  in  any  paper  we  had  received  from  England, 
we  scouted  the  notion. 

Most  urgent  appeals  for  quinine  had  been  coming 
for  some  time  from  the  people  of  Breg  Mati,  and  a 
large  consignment  of  tabloids  had  just  arrived  from 
England.    This  was  our  next  duty. 

The  tribes  of  Klimenti  and  Skreli,  and  scattered 
members  of  other  tribes,  have  both  summer  and  winter 
grazing-grounds  for  their  flocks.  They  descend  from 
the  high  mountain-pastures  in  October,  and  remain 
on  the  fertile  plains  between  the  Drin  and  the  Mati 
till  about  the  middle  of  April.  The  shifting  of  the 
flocks  is  a  fine  sight:  men,  women,  and  children,  in 
native  costumes,  tramp  with  their  pack-horses,  loaded 
high  with  gaily  coloured  bedding  and  big  caldrons, 
followed  by  hundreds  of  bleating,  lowing  beasts. 

This  year  (1911),  however,  the  insurrection  in 
which  they  had  all  intended  to  take  part — for  the 
Klimenti  are  the  most  gallant  of  all  the  tribes — 
broke  out  prematurely  while  they  were  still  in  the 
plains.     The  first  thing  that  the   troops  naturally 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS     95 

did  was  to  block  their  passage,  and  to  pen  them  in 
the  plains  for  the  summer.  The  plains  being  water- 
logged by  reason  of  the  overflow  of  the  Drin  and 
Bojana  Rivers,  are  haunted  by  a  malaria  of  a  most 
virulent  type,  and  the  unfortunate  people  had  been 
rotting  with  it  all  the  summer.  They  suffered, 
indeed,  more  deaths  from  disease  than  did  their 
fighting  brethi'en  fi"om  wounds. 

We  arranged  to  drive  to  Alessio,  the  little  fever-hole 
of  a  town  that  stands  by  the  Drin,  to  give  out  quinine 
there,  to  meet  some  of  the  tribesmen,  and  ride  with 
them  to  Breg  Mati. 

Marko,  my  faithful  old  dragoman,  was  not  coming 
with  us.  As  he  was  helping  us  put  our  goods  into 
the  carriage,  he  remarked:  "  Perhaps  you  had  better 
not  go.     People  say  there  is  going  to  be  a  war." 

"  A  war !"  we  cried,  and  we  laughed  and  drove 
o&. 

News  was  hard  to  get,  for  by  this  time  the  whole 
district  was. more  or  less  in  quarantine  for  cholera, 
and  in  consequence  few  steamers  stopped,  and  letters 
and  newspapers  were  much  delayed. 

Arrived  at  Alessio,  we  found  terrible  excitement. 
Quantities  of  Nizams  were  running  hither  and  thither, 
carrying  white  w^ooden  ammunition  boxes,  and  rushing 
to  the  hill  that  towers  above  the  town,  like  so  many 
ants  on  an  anthill.  Officers,  pack-horses,  transport 
waggons,  soldiers — all  were  on  the  way  to  the  coast 
to  leave  for  Constantinople,  when  a  report  spread 
suddenly  that  the  Italians  were  about  to  land.  The 
troops  turned  back  at  once,  and  were  taking  all 
military  stores  up  to  the  ruined  citadel  on  the  hilltop 
as  fast  as  possible.     "  Now  you  won't  be  able  to  get 


96  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

horses,"  said  our  guide.  "  They  have  commandeered 
them  all." 

Oddly  enough,  I  did  not  take  it  seriously.  I  had 
been  expecting  war  and  hearmg  gunshots  and  artillery 
since  last  April,  and  it  had  all  fizzled  out.  The 
quinine  and  the  fever  patients  seemed  far  more 
important.  The  tribesmen,  who  expected  us,  turned 
up.  They  had  cannily  hidden  their  horses  outside 
the  town,  mounted  us  on  good  ones,  and  we  reached 
Br  eg  Mati  in  three  hours. 

Dom  Notz,  the  priest,  put  us  up  hospitably  in  his 
little  wooden  hut  that  stood  on  high  stone  staddles. 
We  rose  early.  Rain  was  pouring.  By  seven  it 
cleared,  and  we  started  on  our  errand.  Alas  !  Dom 
Notz,  with  the  intention  of  saving  us  a  long  ride  and 
house-to-house  visits,  had  sent  word  overnight  that  the 
free  quinine  had  come,  and  the  poor  people  were  flock- 
ing to  the  village  of  Gursi,  which  was  the  centre  of  the 
district.  The  demand  far  exceeded  our  supply.  It 
was  heart-breaking  work.  The  least  ill  of  the  family 
came  to  beg  for  the  rest.  In  most  houses  it  seemed 
every  person  was  stricken. 

Lean  and  wasted,  their  skin  tight  and  yellow  on 
then-  skulls,  their  eyes  sunken,  they  prayed :  "Give  me 
quinine  for  fifteen  people  ";  "I  have  twenty  "\  "I 
have  six  children,  they  are  dying."  The  quinine 
went  like  snow  m  sunshine.  Many  of  the  vie  tuns 
had  hugely  enlarged  spleens.  In  about  an  hour  and 
a  half  we  dealt  out  6,600  grains  of  quinine,  and  the 
supply  was  exhausted.  A  most  painful  scene  ensued. 
People,  all  rain-soaked,  who  had  been  tramping  since 
early  morning,  arrived,  and  in  despair  prayed  us  to 
have  pity  and  to  give.    And  to  escape  the  sight  of 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS     97 

misery  which  we  could  not  relieve,  we  had  to  mount 
and  ride  away.     It  was  a  scene  I  shall  never  forget. 

The  horses  were  good,  and  we  arrived  fairly  early 
at  Alessio.  A  young  Turkish  officer  at  once  rushed 
up  to  us.  "  Sprechen  Sie  Deutsch?''  he  cried.  We 
did.  He  poured  out  his  grief.  Italy  had  declared 
war.  It  was  true;  there  were  three  Italian  battle- 
ships off  Medua.  The  straight  columns  of  smoke 
from  their  funnels  were  visible  above  the  hills  that  lie 
along  the  coast. 

"  All  is  lost !  All  is  lost !"  he  cried.  "  It  is  that 
accursed  Abdul  Hamid.  He  took  everything  for 
himself,  and  left  us  with  nothing.  No  navy,  no 
Dreadnought,  nothing,  nothmg !  Here  am  I  with 
my  troops,  and  I  cannot  take  them  out.  We  must 
march  to  Monastir.  Unless  England  helps  us,  all  is 
lost.  Tripoli  is  already  lost.''  He  clasped  his  hands 
in  despair. 

"  No  doubt  it  is,''  said  one  of  us,  I  forget  which. 
We  rode  on. 
**  I  am  sorry  for  that  poor  fellow,"  said  Mr.  Nevinson. 
"  I'm  not,"  said  I.    And  I  added:  "  It  is  the  begm- 
ning  of  the  end." 

It  flashed  on  me  that  this  perhaps  was  the  meaning 
of  the  mysterious  thing  which  I  was  pledged  not  to 
reveal — that  Montenegi'o  would  move  in  the  winter 
if  circumstances  allowed.  Throughout  Montenegro 
the  Italians  are  hated  because  by  their  great  industry 
they  at  once  outstrip  the  lazy  Montenegrins  and  make 
money;  but  that  would  not  prevent  a  political  alliance 
for  mutual  benefit.  Italy  would  extend  her  in- 
fluence in  North  Albania — the  Catholics  would  hail 
any  aid  that  would  save  them  from  the  Young  Turks 

7 


98  THE  STEUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

— the  Montenegrins  would  go  into  the  Serb  terri- 
tories of  Berani  and  Kosovo  vilayet.  If  the  constant 
rumours  of  Bulgar  mobilization  were  true,  we  might 
have  the  long-expected  break-up  of  the  Near  East 
upon  us  in  a  month;  and  Austria  would  not  fight, 
but  would  demand,  and  later  obtain,  "  compensa- 
tion/' It  all  seemed  clear  as  daylight.  I  was  highly 
pleased, forltho  ught  that  Albania's  chance  had  come. 
A  party  of  tribesmen  was  escorting  us.  The  horses 
were  "  going  strong  "\  we  rode  at  a  good  pace,  and 
reckoned  we  could  reach  Scutari  by  7  p.m.,  when 
we  discovered  that  the  man  who  carried  our  over- 
coats on  his  saddle  had  dropped  them.  Three  of 
our  men  vrent  back  to  search.  We  remained  with 
one  Maltsor.  Time  passed.  It  began  to  grow  dark. 
The  Maltsor  was  reluctant  to  proceed,  but  we  pushed 
on.  The  moon  came  out,  the  great  plains  of  the  Drin 
were  all  ghostly.  We  rode  through  magic  and 
mystery,  vainly  trying  to  judge  where  we  were  by 
the  dim  silhouettes  of  the  mountains,  till  we  arrived 
at  the  old  wooden  Bachelik  bridge  (destroyed,  alas  ! 
in  the  war),  at  9  p.m.,  and  to  our  astonishment  were 
promptly  arrested.  State  of  war  had  been  pro- 
claimed, and  no  one  w^as  to  be  admitted  to  the  town 
after  sunset.  The  police  outpost  was  very  civil. 
It  spoke  only  Turkish  and  Albanian,  and  set  to  work 
to  write  long  biographies  of  us,  and  to  spit  on  the 
mistakes  and  wipe  them  out  in  Turkish  fashion.  It 
then  sent  us  with  an  armed  escort  to  the  police- 
station  in  the  bazar,  where  we  were  handed  over, 
with  explanations,  and  the  same  performance  was 
repeated,  only  this  time  they  wrote  pages.  I  tried 
to  cheer  matters  by  making  shadows  of  animals  on  the 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS     99 

walls.  Then  we  went  off  again,  and  were  handed 
to  the  towm  police.  Finally  we  were  liberated  at 
11  p.m.  without  a  stain  on  our  characters.  Every- 
one had  known  we  had  gone  the  day  before  to  give 
quinine,  so  that  our  arrest  was  ridiculous.  But  as 
they  said:  "  War  is  war.^'  I  have  told  this  in  detail 
as  it  was  the  first  marked  step  which  the  authorities 


OLD    BACHELIK   BEIDOE. 


took  to  protect  Scutari  from  Italian  invasion.  The 
next  step  was  to  call  for  several  thousand  volunteers 
"  to  defend  the  Fatherland." 

The  day  was  fixed.  The  military  band,  the  crimson 
silk  banner,  and  the  commandant,  Hussein  Riza 
Bey  hhnself,  were  all  ready  in  the  drill-ground  before 
the  Serai,  to  welcome  them  and  swear  them  in. 
Whenever  in  past  times  Turkey  had  made  war,  the 


100         THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 


Albanians  had  swarmed  to  her  standard.  Now  a 
row  of  fifteen  townsmen,  one  of  whom  was  over 
seventy,  and  another  an  habitual  drunkard,  were  all 
that  appeared. 

The  commandant  made  a  brave  speech,  thanking 
them  for  their  patriotism.     A  crowd  of  small  children 

looked  on  and  grinned.  Later, 
from  the  Moslem  villages,  came 
some  more  volunteers.  One 
hundred  and  sixty  men  in  all 
were  ready  to  protect  Albania 
from  Italy.  It  was  a  rude 
shock  to  the  authorities. 

News  was  suppressed.  The 
English  mail  which  came  usually 
over  Italy  went  astray  alto- 
gether. On  October  9  came 
official  news  that  both  Austria 
and  Montenegro,  who  had  been 
dallymg  on  and  of!  with  cholera  quarantine,  had 
decided  to  cut  off  all  communication  with  us.  Mr. 
Nevinson  went  off  in  a  hurry  by  the  last  boat  to 
escape  detention  of  unknown  length,  and  I  was  left, 
feeling  rather  like  "  the  boy  stood  on  the  burning 
deck.'' 

The  Turkish  authorities  circulated  quantities  of 
handbills  describing  victories  at  Tripoli  so  vast  that 
even  the  Moslems  doubted  them  and  inquired  the 
truth  at  the  various  consulates.  In  spite  of  all 
promises  that  the  vernacular  should  be  used,  Turkish 
continued  to  be  the  ofi&cial  language,  and  the  newly 
opened  schools  were  teaching  Arabic  writing  only. 
I  was  overwhelmed  with  relief  work.     Aided  by 


MOSLEM   CHILD. 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS  101 

my  faithful  old  Marko,  I  worked  aU  day  and  every 
day.  To  tell  the  details  would  be  as  wearisome  as 
they  were  in  fact.  Briefly,  I  tried  to  obtain  the  name 
of,  and  number  of,  persons  in  each  burnt-out  family, 
made  alphabetical  lists  of  each  tribe,  and  learnt, 
when  possible,  the  circumstances.  Together  Marko 
and  I  ransacked  the  bazar  for  any  and  every  kind  of 
cheap  warm  material  for  clothes.  All  had  then  to 
be  torn  into  three  -  metre  lengths,  for  the  tribes- 
men are  very  like  a  nursery  full  of  children — what 
one  has  the  other  must  have.  "  We  ask  only  for 
justice,''  they  said.  Moreover,  they  objected  strongly 
to  a  large  family  having  more  than  a  small  one. 
"  It  is  the  '  house  '  which  counts,''  they  said.  For 
a  "  house  "  to  die  out  is  a  great  calamity.  It  is 
better,  therefore,  to  help  small  ones  than  large  ones. 
Nor  could  I  ever  convince  them  that  it  was  absm-d  to 
give  a  ''  house  "  of  twenty-five  persons  the  same 
ration  as  one  of  five.  And,  except  that  I  insisted, 
when  possible,  in  giving  extra  to  widows  with  chil- 
dren, I  had  as  a  rule  to  conform  to  national  usage. 

The  roofing  question  was  extremely  difficult,  for 
the  quarantine  made  importation  of  more  planks 
hopeless.  I  gave  people  the  choice  of  planks  or 
clothes,  and  we  had  endless  trouble. 

At  first  I  dealt  out  shirt-lengths  in  Scutari,  but  it 
caused  too  many  people  to  flock  to  the  town,  and  as 
the  relations  between  tribesmen  and  Turkish  ofiicials 
were  highly  strained,  it  was  desirable  to  keep  them 
apart  as  much  as  possible.  Moreover,  the  simple 
souls  persisted  in  doing  lowly  homage  to  me,  and 
addressing  me  as  "  Queen  "  in  the  streets,  and  this 
caused   the   Turkish  authorities,   very   foolishly,   to 


102 


THE  STEUGGLE  FOK  SCUTARI 


protest    to    the    British    Vice-Consul    against     my 
assuming  a  Royal  title. 

To  avoid  these  difficulties,  we  made  up  great  bales 
of  goods  sewn  in  canvas  (which  could  be  utilized  to 
make  mattresses,  and  was  the  perquisite  of  the  men 
who  acted  as  carriers),  and  the  priest  of  each  tribe 
distributed  the  stuff  and  garments — so  many  pieces 
per  house.  Cutting,  tearing,  sewing,  packing,  the 
wearisome  days  passed  by.     My  only  relief  was  to  go 


mi 


PACK-HORSES. 


out  at  night  and  watch  the  sun  set  crimson  behind 
Rumia,  or  a  golden  full  moon  sail  up  from  the  purple 
mystery  of  the  Shala  Mountains.  Daily  a  bazar 
rumour  of  some  sort  spread  through  the  town. 

On  October  13  a  Scutarene  from  Italy  reported 
huge  Italian  victories,  but  officially  all  were  denied. 

It  was  the  Sultan's  birthday,  and  Mass  was  cele- 
brated at  the  Cathedral.  There  was  a  fairly  large 
congregation  of  Scutarenes,  who,  I  was  told  later, 
prayed  for  the  Sultan's  speedy  conversion.     The  Vali 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS   103 

and  suite  were  present,  but  of  all  the  Consuls  only 
the  Austrian.  In  the  absence  of  Italy,  Austria  was 
trying  to  be  prominent  and  make  up  for  lost  time. 
The  Archbishop,  who  officiated,  omitted  the  final 
Benediction,  and  the  Vali  and  suite  departed  without 
bemg  commended  to  the  care  of  the  Holy  Trinity — 
a  fact  which  gave  infinite  satisfaction  to  the  more 
pious  of  the  Chiistians. 

There  was  whispered  talk  of  Bulgarian  mobiliza- 
tion and  of  Montenegrin  movement  near  Tuzi. 
About  the  middle  of  October  we  heard  that  King 
Nikola  of  Montenegro  was  making  a  tour  through 
all  his  provhices  on  the  Herzegovinian  frontier — a 
district  he  had  not  visited  for  thhty  years.  As  a 
result,  the  Ministers  of  the  Triple  Entente  at  Cettigne 
at  once  expressed  to  His  Majesty  the  desire  of  their 
Governments  *'  that  peace  should  be  maintained  in 
the  Balkans.''  Russia  had  been  very  nasty  about  it, 
France  mild,  and  England  firm.  So  said  Petar  Pla- 
menatz,  then  Montenegrin  Consul  at  Scutari,  and 
mightily  disgusted  he  was;  and  a  voice  spread  that, 
in  spite  of  quarantine  regulations,  some  Maltsor  heads 
had  been  summoned  to  Cettigne.  They  did  not  go, 
however,  I  believe. 

The  Vali  meantime  did  his  best  to  keep  peace 
with  the  Maltsors,  but  could  get  no  money  from  Con- 
stantmople  for  the  promised  house  compensation. 
Money  had  started,  it  was  said,  but  had  been  "  held 
up  "  by  a  doctor  of  Korteha,  who,  as  he  was  owed  a 
large  sum  by  the  Government,  had,  with  the  aid  of  a 
band  of  friends,  paid  himself.  Had  it  not  been  for 
the  blow  to  Turkish  feeluigs  when  no  Albanian 
volunteers  were  forthcoming,  I  doubt  if  the  money 


104 


THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 


would  ever  have  been  paid.  But  Turkey  could  not 
afford  an  internal  revolt  at  this  moment,  and  on 
October  16  part  of  Hoti  and  Gruda,  as  the  most  im- 
portant of  the  tribes,  were  paid.  This  only  made  the 
others  furious.  Winter  was  rapidly  approaching,  and 
the  money  urgently  required. 

It  was  the  feast  of  the  Madonna  of  Scutari — 
Scutari's  greatest  day — the  anniversary  of  that  day 
in  1479  when  the  Venetians,  after  a  siege  of  nearly 
a  year,  were  forced  to  cede  Scutari  to  the  Turks,  and 


PILGEIMAGE  TO  THE  OLD  CHURCH  OF  THE  MADONNA  OF  SCUTARI. 

the  angels  swooped  down  upon  the 'little  church  at 
the  foot  of  the  citadel,  flew  away  over  the  Adriatic 
with  the  picture  of  the  Holy  Virgin,  and  saved  it  from 
the  infidels.  Pilgrims  trudged  to  pray  at  the  ruins, 
and  the  Cathedral  was  crammed  with  miserable  peop  le 
who  came  to  beg  theii-  Madonna's  aid.  I  recognized 
many.  A  man,  wearing  one  of  the  shii-ts  I  had  given, 
fixed  large  brown  eyes  on  me,  and  edged  his  way 
through  the  crowd  till  he  could  kneel  and  pray  by 
my  side.     Then  he  rose  and  went. 

In  honour  of  the  day  my  old  Marko  invited  several 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS   105 

headmen  to  dinner — a  noble  meal.  We  had  a  wash- 
hand  basin  full  of  soup  and  boiled  mutton,  another 
full  of  rice,  and  then  pancakes.  In  recognition  of  the 
immense  hospitality,  it  was  correct  to  take  two  pan- 
cakes and  leave  one  uneaten.  This  mark  of  polite- 
ness pleased  Marko  immensely — it  was,  indeed,  a  re- 
markable instance  of  "  manners,"  for  the  tribesmen 
had  not  eaten  such  a  meal  for  many  a  long  day — and 
he  told  a  tale  of  a  man  who  was  fined  five  napoleons 
by  his  tribe,  and  condemned  to  stand  his  judges  a 
dinner,  because  a  stranger  guest  had  emptied  his  plate 
— a  sure  sign  that  his  host  had  been  niggardly. 

The  tribesmen  told  that  there  was  trouble  in 
Djakova.  The  local  chieftain,  Zef-i-vogel  (Joseph 
the  Little),  had  been  asked  to  pay  "  dun.''  The  tax- 
collectors  had  tried  to  take  one  horse  out  of  eight, 
instead  of  one  out  of  ten,  and  Zef  and  his  friends  had 
opened  fire  and  killed  three  Turks.  That  Isa  Boletin 
was  between  Ipck  and  Prishtina  preparing  to  take  the 
warpath  again;  that  it  was  not  true  he  had  made  it 
up  with  the  Turks.  He  had  been  keeping  quiet  only 
until  he  had  made  them  compensate  hmi  for  the 
house  they  had  burnt. 

A  Djakova  man  reported  that  Djakova  was  "  so- 
so;  as  hot  as  cold."  All  the  tribesmen  of  Dukagin 
who  had  taken  no  part  in  the  insurrection  began  ap- 
pealmg  to  the  Vali  for  maize,  money,  and,  above  all, 
arms.  They  came  perfectly  seriously,  and  argued: 
"  It  is  true  we  did  not  revolt,  but  it  was  not  our  fault. 
We  should  have  done  so  at  once  if  we  had  had  arms. 
It  is  very  unfair  to  give  all  these  presents  to  the  men 
of  Maltsia  e  madhe,  and  nothing  to  us."  When  told 
they  were  not  included  ui  the  concessions,  they  replied : 


108        THE  STKUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

"  Very  well;  so  soon  as  we  can  get  arms  we  will  revolt, 
and  then  you  will  have  to  give  us  maize  and  money, 
too."  Nor  could  they  see  the  situation  otherwise. 
The  Vali  was  hard  put  to  it. 

The  tribesmen  read  bones  anxiously  to  learn  the 
future,  and  a  Maltsor  saw  "  blood  in  Scutari  in  a  fort- 
night if  the  fowl  has  been  properly  killed — at  any  rate, 
very  soon."  And  all  the  bones,  fowls'  and  sheep's 
alike,  told  ''  a  great  war  soon." 

Italy,  it  is  true,  had  been  prevented  from  attempt- 
ing to  land  in  Albania  by  Austria,  and  had  retired 
after  a  futile  bombardment  of  Medua — or,  rather,  the 
spot  where  Medua  is  marked  on  the  map,  for  a  tumble- 
down barrack,  a  dirty  Custom-house,  a  han,  and  a 
few  scattered  houses  are  all  that  Medua  can  show. 
The  Italian  papers  announced  that  the  Palazza  Muni- 
cipale  had  been  completely  destroyed  by  the  Italian 
fleet,  and  all  who  knew  Medua  smiled ;  but  there  was 
a  general  feeling  that  Italy  would  return,  and  that 
next  time — well,  who  knew  ? 

In  the  town  a  weekly  excitement  was  the  Hana  (The 
Moon),  Scutari's  only  newspaper.  The  Albanian  one 
had  died  of  inanition,  for  it  was  prohibited  from  pub- 
lishing any  recent  news  save  that  given  by  the  Govern- 
ment, and  that  the  populace  disbelieved.  The  Hamt 
{The  Moon),  on  the  contrary,  which  was  published  in 
Italian  by  a  Jew,  one  Pardo,  who  had  turned  Moslem, 
ran  an  exciting  and  excited  career.  It  began  as  Dil 
{The  Sim),  was  suppressed,  and  came  out  next  day 
as  The  Moon.  Pardo  was  a  highly  enthusiastic 
"  Union  and  Progress "  man,  and,  according  to 
popular  report,  his  paper  was  the  paid  organ  of  the 
party.      At  starting  he  explained  to  me  that  he  was 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS    107 

making  an  entirely  new  start  in  journalism.  Hitherto 
editors  had  described  mainly  things  that  took  place 
by  daylight,  and  these  any  fool  could  see  for  himself. 
He  was  going  to  confine  hmiself  to  ascertaining  and 
describing  where  everybody  passed  the  night. 

A  dirtier  and  more  entertaming  dog  I  never  met. 
He  set  spies  at  the  doors  of  all  persons  of  importance, 
and  prowled  about  in  the  dark.  "  Why  waste 
money  V  he  asked,  "  on  foreign  correspondence, 
when  the  domgs  of  your  next-door  neighbour  are 
so  much  more  interesting  V  He  spared  no  one  of 
the  European  residents,  and  attacked  one  Consulate 
after  the  other,  pouring  out  cataracts  of  obscene 
rhymes,  describing  his  victims,  but  seldom  giving 
names.  Consulate  after  Consulate  protested  indig- 
nantly. Pardo  asked  mildly:  "Why  did  you  think 
it  was  meant  for  you  V  And  the  Vali  said  gravely: 
"  We  have  now  Constitutional  Government  in  Tur- 
key, and  complete  freedom  of  the  Press."  If  The 
Moon  were  suppressed,  it  would  only  reappear  as  The 
Star ;  "  so  why  worry  V  The  more  folk  protested, 
the  better  was  Pardo  pleased.  Plamenatz,  as  Monte- 
negi"in  Consul,  was  rabid  about  some  filthy  verses  on 
the  Queen  of  Italy.  His  protest  brought  out  some 
worse  ones  on  the  whole  Montenegrin  Royal  Family. 

As  "  Queen  of  the  Mountahis,''  I  was  treated  to  a 
whole  column  of  scurrility,  and  said  nothing  at  all. 
A  second  attack  followed,  and  then  no  more.  Every- 
one was  curious  to  know  what  steps  I  had  taken. 
1  had  taken  none.  But  the  gallant  Mallsors  had  sent 
a  message  to  Pardo  to  the  cflcct  that  the  very  next 
tune  he  insulted  the  Kralitza  he  would  be  shot  dead. 
Next  time   I   met  Pardo   in   the   street  I  shouted: 


108        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

**  Hullo,  Pardo  !  how  are  you?"  He  ran  like  a 
rabbit,  and  the  populace  laughed  aloud.  The  Hana 
flourished,  like  weeds  on  manure,  till  the  following 
summer,  when  the  Union  and  Progress  party  fell. 
Pardo  then  made  bold  to  attack  the  party  which  suc- 
ceeded it.  Poor  Pardo  !  The  "  Constitutional  Free- 
dom of  the  Press,"  upon  which  he  had  relied  so  long, 
collapsed  at  once.  He  was  promptly  expelled  the 
country,  and  The  Moon  has  never  again  materialized. 
It  was  my  fii'st  and  last  experience  of  Young  Turk 
journalism. 

But  this  is  anticipating. 

So  far  as  the  Maltsors  were  concerned,  the  Vali's 
intentions  were  excellent;  but  he  could  not  pay  them, 
for  the  rest  of  the  money  did  not  arrive.  Misery 
increased.  The  Austrian  hospital  was  full  of  cases 
of  sickness  caused  by  hunger  and  exposure. 

News  came  from  the  mountains  that  poor  gallant 
old  Marash  Hutzi  of  Hoti  was  dead  of  pneumonia. 
He  was  the  first  man  I  had  persuaded  to  return,  and 
I  felt  as  though  I  had  killed  him.  The  only  comfort 
was  that  Padre  Sebastian  had  tended  him  in  the 
Church- house;  he  had  not  died  out  in  the  rain.  I 
mourned  him  at  the  time,  but  am  glad  now  that  he 
who  had  given  all  his  life  to  attempts  to  free  Albania 
has  not  lived  to  see  his  beloved  tribe  Hoti  handed 
by  Europe  to  Montenegro,  in  spite  of  all  its  protests, 
for  it  was  owing  to  Marash  primarily  that  the  Monte- 
negrins did  not  get  Tuzi  in  the  Berlin  Treaty  days. 
He  it  was  who  then  brought  down  the  tribesmen,  and 
successfully  resisted  the  Montenegrin  occupation. 
He  died  hoping  and  believing  that  liberty  was  in 
sight.     It  is  better  not  to  live  too  long. 


THE  GATHEKING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS   109 

There  was  constant  friction  between  the  troops  and 
the  tribesmen.  The  woods  near  Breg  Mati  and 
Alessio  were  haunted  by  "  komits/'  who  w^ere  at 
blood  with  the  Government.  A  soldier — one  of 
several  sent  to  patrol  the  district — met  some  of  them, 
and  called  "  Halt  \"  They  took  no  notice.  He  chal- 
lenged again,  and  raised  his  rifle,  but  before  he  could 
fire  dropped  with  a  bullet  in  his  breast.  Sorely 
wounded,  he  cried  out  that  he  was  a  Christian.  The 
**  komits,''  too  late,  befriended  him,  and  summoned 
a  priest.  He  asked  that  the  silver  cross  that  hung 
round  his  neck  might  be  buried  with  him,  and  died 
in  a  few  hours.  His  dying  wish  was  fulfilled.  The 
Maltsors  regretted  his  death,  saying  no  doubt  he  had 
been  forced  to  serve  against  his  will. 

There  was  great  and  growing  discontent  among  the 
Christian  soldiers,  principally  Greeks,  of  whom  a  con- 
siderable number  were  quartered  in  the  town.  The 
enforcing  of  general  military  service  was  one  of  the 
Young  Turks'  fatal  errors.  Exemption  from  military 
service  had  been  the  Christians'  one  valuable  privi- 
lege, and  no  arguments  of  the  Young  Turk  could 
convince  them  that  it  was  a  privilege  to  be  allowed 
to  serve  the  Turkish  Government.  The  tales  of  ill- 
treatment  which  the  Christian  recruits  spread,  the 
disorder  caused  by  their  frequent  desertion,  and  the 
constant  friction  between  them  and  the  Moslem 
troops,  must  all  have  assisted  towards  the  final 
catastrophe.  In  Scutari,  at  any  rate,  hatred  of  the 
Young  Turk  was  inflamed  not  only  by  the  Clu-istian 
troops  in  the  town,  but  by  letters  received  by  the 
relatives  of  the  few  Albanian  youths  who  had  been 
pressed  for  service,  and  were  in  distant  parts. 


110        THE  STEUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

The  Orthodox  troops  in  Scutari  bad  been  promised 
a  priest  as  army  chaplain,  and  none  had  been  ap- 
pointed owing  to  dissensions  in  Constantinople  as  to 
whether  the  right  of  appomtment  belonged  to  Church 
or  State.  They  complained  bitterly  of  insult  and  ill- 
treatment  to  the  Orthodox  Bishop  of  Durazzo.  He 
protested  to  Hussem  Riza,  who  replied  that  he  re- 
gretted that  the  charge  was  true,  but  it  w^as  all  the 
fault  of  the  chaiishes  (under-ofl&cers),  and  he  could 
do  nothing. 

And  ever  the  Italians'  war  on  Tripoli  raised  hope 
that  aU  the  Powers  together  would  do  something. 
Italy  was  regarded  by  many  as  the  only  dog  who  had 
dared  blood  the  badger.  When  Count  Mancinelli, 
the  Italian  Consul,  left  Scutari,  and  the  Italian  Post- 
Office,  dispensary,  and  schools  were  closed,  Pardo  in 
the  Hana  tried  hard  to  arouse  Moslem  wrath  against 
the  remaining  Italian  inhabitants,  and  failed  com- 
pletely. From  the  Djakova  and  Prizren  districts 
came  new^s  that  from  there,  too,  Italy's  action  was 
seized  on  as  an  opportunity  for  harrying  the  Turks, 
that  much  sniping  of  soldiers  was  going  on,  and  that 
the  half-stai'A'ed  population  of  the  districts  devastated 
by  the  Turks  in  the  previous  year  was  plundering 
wherever  possible.  "  Things  have  never  been  so  bad 
as  under  Constituzi,"  said  folk. 

Mirdita  became  uppish,  and  demanded  the  im- 
mediate withdrawal  of  the  military  outposts  in  her 
territory,  and  the  Government  hastily  complied. 
The  Maltsia  e  madhe  m.en  at  once  followed  suit,  and 
clamoured  for  the  withdrawal  of  the  troops  from 
their  land.  This  was  refused,  as  the  said  troops  were 
declared  to  be  frontier  guards  against  Montenegrin 


I 


THE  GATHEKTNG  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS    111 

attack.  Already  before  Christmas  the  Turks  were 
well  aware  that  an  attack  from  Montenegro  was 
highly  probable,  and  it  was  for  tins  reason  that  a 
General  as  good  as  Hussein  Riza  was  placed  there. 

There  was  a  lull  in  the  quarantine  arrangements, 
and  seven  belated  letter-bags  turned  up  all  at  once. 
I  learnt  that  I  was  to  act  as  agent  of  the  Macedonian 
Relief  Fund,  that  some  more  money  was  forth- 
coming, and  that  the  Italians  were  making  slow  but 
sure  progress  at  Tripoli.  The  tarred  felt,  too,  ar- 
rived from  Trieste,  and  the  Vali,  who  had  not  yet 
received  the  rest  of  the  house  compensation  money, 
and  was  genuinely  anxious  to  help  any  re-roofing 
scheme,  kindly  admitted  it  all  duty  free.  But  the 
highly  conserv^ative  Maltsors  at  first  declined  to  have 
anything  to  do  with  it.  I  was  dismayed.  It  had 
cost  several  hundred  pounds  of  my  little  fimd,  Mr. 
Summa,  our  Vice-Consul,  had  had  endless  trouble  in 
getting  it  up  the  river — for  the  londras  (barges)  were 
all  commandeered  for  military  stores — and  now  the 
tribesmen  said :  **  No,  we  don't  want  it.  We  want 
shirts  and  planks."  My  canny  old  friend,  Mirasli 
Lutzi,  however,  turned  up.  Mirash  has  an  extra- 
ordinary eye  for  the  main  chance,  and  was,  and  is, 
ready  to  accept  anything  and  everything.  He  bore 
off  several  rolls  of  the  **  carton,"  and  speedily  con- 
structed such  a  fine  watertight  roof  that  its  fame  flew 
through  the  land,  and  the  wlmle  country  clamoured: 
"  Carton,  carton !"  Fortunately,  the  autunm  was 
unusually  dry  and  fine.  There  was  still  time  to  do 
some  roofing.  I  ordered  more  "  carton."  The  dis- 
tributing and  seeing  it  despatched  on  horses  and  in 
barges  was  a  great  task. 


112         THE  STEUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

On  November  111  started  out  with  Marko  on  horse- 
back to  visit  the  nearer  districts  to  try  and  find  the 
poorest  cases,  and  took  bread  and  sardines  enough  to 
last  us  four  days — this  I  have  found  to  be  the  most 
portable  and  sustaining  food  for  rough  travel — and  a 
sleeping  -  sack,  and  filled  up  the  saddlebags  with 
children's  combinations. 

We  arrived  at  Baitza  after  four  hours'  ride,  and 
put  up  at  one  of  the  few  unburnt  houses.  The  poor 
owners  were  very  much  pleased  to  see  me.  Their 
house  had  been  completely  pillaged,  and  the  few 
cooking-pots  and  covers  they  had  were  the  result  of 
the  help  I  had  given  them  at  Podgoritza. 

Though  bright,  the  weather  was  very  cold.  Three 
little  girls,  the  youngest  only  three,  sat  sniffling, 
miserably  trying  to  warm  their  fingers  by  thrusting 
them  under  the  one  tattered  garment  which  each 
wore.  The  wretched  infant  whined  ceaselessly,  half 
perished  with  cold.  I  handed  out  one  of  the  little 
combinations,  and  the  mother  put  it  on  over  the 
ragged  cotton  shirt  which  was  all  it  had  on.  When 
clad,  it  looked  like  a  large  grey  frog.  The  result  was 
surprising.  In  half  an  hour,  as  it-  warmed  up,  it 
began  to  chatter  and  to  frisk  about  like  a  little  lamb. 
But  the  two  others  wept  miserably.  I  had  no  gar- 
ment large  enough  for  them. 

The  afternoon  was  passed  in  a  four  hours'  ride 
round  the  district.  At  night  we  shared  our  bread 
with  the  family,  and  slept  on  the  bare  floor.  We 
were  in  luxury — some  of  the  few  who  had  a  roof 
over  our  heads. 

All  next  morning  I  visited  houses  at  Baitza,  and 
rode  on  to  Skreli  in  the  afternoon — up,  up  into  the 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS   113 

high  ^-alley.  The  sun  went  clown  magnificently, 
and  the  brown,  dried  brushwood  on  the  mountain- 
side looked  like  great  stale  bloodstains  in  the  niddy 
light.  Before  us  were  blackened  ruins.  The  man 
guiding  us  rode  ahead  on  a  most  wretched  white 
horse.  And  the  Skreli  Valley  seemed  a  Valley  of  the 
Shadow  of  Death. 

Out  of  the  many  burnt-out  families  I  visited  next 
day,  I  remember  vividly  the  cackling  laugh  of  one 
old  woman:  *'  The  Sultan/'  she  said,  "  is  the  stupidest 


■41?,^ 


3jrTit"  Out. 


man  in  the  w^orld.  First  he  spent  a  lot  of  money  to 
burn  down  our  poor  houses.  Now  he  must  spend  a 
lot  more  to  build  them  up  again.'' 

The  attempt,  indeed,  to  gain  anything  by  violent 
means  (by  reverting,  that  is,  to  primitive  bestiality) 
costs  both  victor  and  vanquished  so  dearly  that  it  is 
questionable  whether  any  good  cause  has  ever  re- 
ceived from  it  enough  to  compensate,  not  merely  for 
the  actual  ruin  entailed,  but  for  the  moral  and  mental 
degradation  that  must  ensue.  The  good  cause  may 
emerge  triumphant,  but  it  is  filthily  defiled.     And 

8 


114        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

the  sins  of  the  fathers  haunt  the  children  in  the  form 
of  hatreds  that  never  sleep  nor  slumber,  but  wait 
only  thi'ough  generations,  till  the  moment  comes  to 
strike. 

One  more  picture  will  I  give  of  relief  work,  and  then 
pass  on  to  the  political  developments  of  the  situation. 

Ded  Soko  and  his  brother  Djeto,  two  gallant  and 
honest  Maltsors  of  Klimenti,  begged  me  to  come  again 
to  Breg  Mati  with  quinine.  Ded  and  thi-ee  of  his 
men  came,  as  armed  escort,  to  fetch  me. 

It  was  December  1.  I  wore  a  big  "  talagan '' 
(shepherd's  cloak)  to  keep  out  the  cold,  and  we 
started  in  the  grey  of  8  a.m.  As  we  breasted  the  hill, 
the  wonderful  view  opened — the  waters  were  out 
and  all  the  land  a  silver,  shimmering  flood,  with 
inky  clouds  above,  and  the  purple  Mirdite  moun- 
tains beyond. 

Ded  rode  a  pacing  grey,  and  pushed  on  over  by- 
ways, across  country,  through  fords,  up  banks,  over 
sludge,  and  between  willows.  Who  can  pretend  that 
a  tar-paved  road  can  ever  give  the  joy  of  such  a  plunge 
into  the  unknown  ?  We  cantered  into  Alessio,  and 
halted  to  rest  the  horses.  Joined  by  a  lot  more 
tribesmen,  we  were  off  again  before  it  was  dark. 
But  as  the  light  faded,  down  came  the  storm  that  had 
threatened  all  day.  By  the  time  we  reached  the 
forest  it  was  pitch  dark,  and  the  rain  falling  in 
torrents.  Ded  whistled  a  loud  signal,  and  plunged 
into  a  narrow  track.  I  could  barely  see,  as  a  grey 
patch,  his  horse  as  he  rode  full  trot  ahead  through 
mud  and  water,  yelling  "  heads  "  when  the  branches 
were  too  low,  and  I  lay  flat  on  the  horse's  neck  and 
felt  them  thrash  over  me.     Through  mud  and  dark- 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS   115 

ness  our  beasts  slithered,  slipped,  spread-eagled,  and 
recovered.  Twice  my  horse  climbed  over  an  invisible 
tree  fallen  across  the  track.  The  rain  hissed  and 
whistled.  I  could  not  see  a  yard  ahead.  But  the 
horse  followed  on.  It  was  an  Erl  King  and  Wild 
Hunter  ride.  Great  luminous  fungi,  high  upon 
rottuig  trees,  stood  out  here  and  there  uncanny  in 
the  blackness  like  lumps  of  dead  fish,  and  saved  me 
once  from  cannoning  into  a  trunk. 

We  emerged  at  last  into  a  lane,  saw  the  friendly 
lights  of  Ded's  house,  and  were  soon  seated  in  a  great 
room,  where  two  tree-trunks  blazed  under  a  hooded 
chimney.  Djeto  and  Ded,  the  two  brothers,  had  built 
themselves  one  of  the  finest  houses  in  the  country 
with  the  proceeds  of  many  years'  industry.  They 
owned  big  flocks  of  sheep,  goats,  and  cattle.  A 
great  family  of  relations  all  lived  together,  and  I  was 
magnificently  entertained.  Mother-wit  and  natural 
good  feeling  had  raised  these  two  quite  untravelled 
and  unlettered  men  to  a  surprising  degree  of  civiliza- 
tion, in  the  best  sense  of  the  word.  I  little  thought 
as  we  talked,  and  they  told  of  their  great  desire  for 
a  school  of  agriculture  to  teach  how  best  the  land 
might  be  developed,  that  in  less  than  a  year  the  big 
house  and  every  shed  and  stable  would  be  burnt  to 
the  ground,  and  that  later  I  should  see  Djeto  dead, 
in  his  coffin,  shot  down  by  an  assassin's  bullet. 
Peace  to  his  ashes.  He  was  a  brave  and  honest 
man,  and  a  true  patriot. 

Already,  then,  by  his  work  among  the  poor  and 
sick,  he  was  gaining  great  influence  among  the  tribes- 
men, and  his  increased  popularity  brought  down 
upon  him  the  hatred  of  the  hereditary  chiefs,  among 


116        THE  STEUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

them  Essad  Pasha.  None  of  them  wished  a  man  of 
no  family  to  rise  to  power  among  the  mountain- 
men. 

When  trouble  came  and  war,  Djeto  and  Ded  had 
won  the  tiiist  and  faith  of  most  of  the  tribes,  and 
Djeto  paid  for  this  with  his  life.  But  the  future  was 
still  unknown  to  us,  and  with  Ded  next  day  I  rode 
round  and  gave  out  quinine,  to  the  great  gratitude 
and  relief  of  the  fever-stricken  people.  And  I  left 
Ded  a  quantity  for  further  distribution. 

Returning  to  Scutari,  I  again  found  a  war-scare 
at  Alessio:  three  Italian  warships  were  said  to  be 
in  sight,  and  again  the  troops  w^ere  making  active 
preparations  for  defence.  They  told  the  Maltsors 
that  fifty  Italians  had  been  crucified  by  the  Turks 
at  Tripoli,  and  warned  them  that  that  would  be  the 
fate  of  all  Christians.  Oddly  enough,  this  was  the 
first  that  I  heard  of  atrocities  at  Tripoli. 

Passing  through  Bushati,  I  found  the  Christians  all 
furious.  They  declared  that  when  the  taxes  were 
collected,  the  bulk  was  taken  fi-om  them,  and  that 
Moslems  were  exempted.  One  of  the  headmen  said 
he  had  given  up  £16  worth  of  weapons  last  year 
without  any  compensation,  and  that  he  would  pay 
no  more  tax  till  that  sum  was  worked  ofi. 

On  December  19  an  envoy  from  the  Maltsors  com- 
municated to  me  that  the  Austrian  Consul-General 
had  sent  for  the  heads,  and  told  them  they  must 
not  revolt  next  year ;  but  promised  that  if  they  would 
remain  quiet  two  years,  they  should  be  freed  from  the 
Turks  by  Austria.  They  replied :  "  Give  us  the  ten 
thousand  rifles  Austria  promised  us  when  Bosnia 
was  annexed,  and  we  can  take  care  of  ourselves." 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS   117 

Further,  tliat  the  Moslems  throughout  Albania  had 
learnt  over  Tripoli  that  the  Young  Turks  were  not 
able  to  protect  their  own  territories,  and  that  it 
would  be  better  for  them  to  strike  for  freedom  along 
with  the  Clu'istians,  than  to  wait  for  Albania  to  be 
divided  between  the  Slavs,  Greeks,  and  perhaps 
Austria  when  Turkey  broke  up,  as  they  saw  it  must 
do  in  the  near  future. 

I  said  that  a  revolt  was  madness,  if  they  meant  to 
make  a  little  one  like  last  year's.  He  said:  "  Stone 
on  stone  makes  a  tower;  grain  by  grain  a  loaf.  It 
will  be  good  bread,  God  willing.'' 

Hopes  were  raised  by  the  discontent  of  the  mili- 
tary. The  Christians  were  constantly  deserting, 
paying  the  Maltsors  with  their  rifles  and  cartridge 
belts  to  guide  them  over  the  border.  All  troops, 
both  Moslem  and  Christian,  were  suffering  badly  from 
cold  and  damp  under  canvas  on  the  Tri  Alberi  plain. 
Many  were  said  to  be  time-expired.  They  petitioned 
Hussein  Riza:  "  If  there  is  war,  send  us,  and  we  will 
fight.  If  not,  send  us  somewhere  where  there  are 
barracks — or  dismiss  us."  No  notice  was  taken, 
and  on  the  night  of  December  22  they  revolted. 
Sharp  firing  was  heard  in  the  camp  at  midnight. 
An  alarm  spread.  The  men  on  Tarabosh  were  to 
have  revolted  too,  and  fired  on  the  town,  but  owing 
to  some  mistake,  the  Tri  Alberi  camp  rose  first.  The 
artillery  remained  loyal,  the  machine  guns  were 
pointed  at  the  rebels,  who  had  at  once  to  surrender. 
The  affair  was  hushed  up.  Only  freshly  turned  earth 
by  the  camp  bore  witness  to  the  fact  that  more  than 
one  corpse  had  been  buried  that  night. 

Christmas  was  upon  us,  and  all  the  land  was  a 


118        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

hubble-bubble  of  hate.  News  came  that,  as  ven- 
geance for  a  bomb  outrage  at  Istib,  the  Turks  were 
massacring  Bulgars  wholesale  in  Macedonia.  The 
bomb  had  been  prepared  at  Sofia  for  the  express 
purpose  of  exciting  reprisals.  Was  it  the  war 
signal  ? 

But  a  fierce  quarrel  between  Servia  and  Montenegro 
looked  ill  for  a  Balkan  Alliance.  Nicephor,  the  Serb- 
Orthodox  Bishop  of  Prizren,  had  been  dismissed  for 
loose  conduct.  The  Patriarchia  appointed  as  his 
successor,  one  Dochich,  a  Montenegrin  from  Moracha. 
Servia,  who  had  pegged  out  this  district  as  her  claim, 
was  furious.  The  Montenegrins,  whose  war-cry  was, 
*'  Onward,  onward,  let  me  see  Prizren  \"  regarded  it 
triumphantly  as:  "  Check  to  your  King  \" 

The  Serb  priests  of  the  diocese  refused  to  recog- 
nize the  new  Bishop,  and  telegraphed  to  the  one 
Orthodox  priest  in  Scutari  to  go  out  on  strike  with 
them.  He,  being  Montenegrin,  refused,  and  his  tiny 
flock  supported  hmi. 

Christmas  was  dree  and  hopeless  beyond  all  words. 
I  shivered  all  alone  at  supper  in  an  unwarmed  room. 
And  one  lump  of  sticky  pink  stuff  on  a  plate  was  the 
only  sign  of  Peace  and  Goodwill.  I  was  about  to 
beg  leave  to  join  mine  host  and  the  servants  in  the 
kitchen  when  the  belated  postman  arrived  with  two 
books  from  a  friend.  He  was  surprised  at  the  size 
of  the  Christmas-box  he  received,  and  I  passed  a 
happy  evenmg,  reading  snug  in  my  sleeping-sack. 
So  ended  the  long,  unhappy  year. 

It  was  bitterly  cold.  All  the  mountains  were 
white.  I  could  not  deal  out  clothes  fast  enough. 
Through   the    long   winter   evenings   I    made    sixty 


THE  GATIIERTXG  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS    119 

wadded  coats  for  children,  and  employed  people  in 
the  bazar  to  make  several  hundred. 

One  gleam  only  brightonod  the  general  hopeless- 
ness. A  cheque  from  Mr.  Crane  enabled  me  to  go 
on  with  the  work.  Unluckily,  it  had  to  be  paid 
tlirough  the  ^lontenegrin  Consulate,  and  Petar 
Plamenatz  blabbed  about  the  amount  ("  Mon  Dieu, 
quel  diplomat  !"  as  one  of  his  colleagues  remarked), 
and  a  rush  of  mountain  people  consequently  poured 
in  upon  me. 

Grim  deed  darkened  the  first  days  of  the  New 
Year.  The  soldiers  at  Tri  Alberi  again  petitioned, 
and  this  time  a  mimber — said  to  be  time-expu-ed. 
but  forced  to  remain  with  the  colours  because  the 
country  was  on  a  war  footing — were  given  teskerehs 
(passports)  permitting  them  to  leave. 

Old  Marko  came  in,  saying:  "Poor  devils,  how 
happy  they  are  !  All  last  night  they  were  singing 
and  dancing.     Now  they  are  going  home." 

Their  joy  was  short-lived.  The  first  lot  were 
allowed  to  go  as  far  as  Vaspas,  some  three  days' 
march,  and  were  there  challenged  by  the  military 
outpost.  In  vain  they  showed  their  teskerehs. 
These  had  only  been  given  in  order  to  disarm  them 
and  get  them  safely  outside  the  town,  out  of  sight 
of  Consular  eyes.  A  number  were  shot  down,  and 
others  were  drowned  in  the  foid.  Meanwhile  the 
second  batch  had  reached  V^audys,  all  unaware  of 
wliat  was  happening.  These  also  were  stopped  as 
deserters.  Tlieir  despairing  apj)eals  and  attempt  to 
escape  were  vain.  The  military  outpost  fired  on  the 
u I  armed  mon.  Altogether  of  the  happy  party  that 
had  started  homewards  some  two  hundred  were  re- 


120        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

ported  to  have  perished.  The  survivors  were  brought 
back  as  prisoners  and  put  to  forced  labour  on  the 
roads. 

It  was  a  piece  of  cold-blooded  treachery  which 
disgusted  all  foreigners  in  the  town,  though  Hussein 
Riza  defended  it  as  the  best  way  of  suppressing  revolt. 
A  large  number  of  recruits  from  Asia  Minor  arrived 
shortly  afterwards,  bare-legged  to  mid-thigh.  Blue 
with  cold,  they  staggered  through  Scutari,  followed 
by  two  carts  piled  with  what  looked  like  dying  men. 
And  the  Albanians,  growling  deep,  swore  that  nothing 
should  ever  force  them  to  do  military  service  for 
Turkey. 

Politics  flowed,  as  usual,  a  dirty  course  through  the 
sewers.  Turkey  made  an  attempt  to  buy  the  Arch- 
bishop's support  by  the  offer  of  a  small  decoration, 
which  he  flatly  refused.  Montenegro  thereupon 
offered  him  a  big  one,  which  he  also  refused,  to  King 
Nikolai's  great  mortification. 

The  Turkish  Government,  now  in  the  eleventh 
hour,  began  in  haste  to  press  on  public  works.  French 
engineers  arrived  in  numbers.  Roads,  bridges,  canals 
— all  were  to  be  constructed ;  there  was  to  be  employ- 
ment for  everyone.  Vast  plans  were  made  and  little 
done. 

In  the  opening  of  Turkish  schools,  however,  the 
Government  was  busy,  and  boys  were  collected  from 
all  over  the  country. 

Then  came  difficulties.  Those  who  had  come  with 
the  belief  they  were  to  learn  Albanian  were  disgusted 
and  disappointed,  and  began  the  study  of  their  own 
language  on  their  own  account.  Two  Moslems  who 
had  been  found  with  a  Life  of  their  national  hero 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS    121 

Skanderbeg  in  the  vernacular  were  expelled  and  came 
to  me  for  help.  I  advised  their  writing  to  the  Albanian 
member  for  Prishtina,  which  they  did,  and  owing  to 
his  intervention,  they  were  reinstated.  But  the 
authorities  learnt  nothing  by  this  lesson,  and  expelled 
two  more  boys  from  another  school  for  similar  reasons. 
These,  though  Moslem,  went  to  the  school  of  the 
Franciscans,  an  almost  unprecedented  step.  And 
the  language  question  continued  to  cause  great  friction 
in  the  town. 


CHAPTEK  VII 

MUBLEZ  !    MUBLEZ  !  ! 

All  through  January  the  discontent  of  the  tribesmen 
increased.  The  men  of  Maltsia  e  niadhe  came  and 
complained  to  me  constantly  that  the  house  com- 
pensation money  was  insufficient,  and  the  Dukagin 
men  that  they,  who  had  not  revolted,  had  received 
no  presents  at  all.  It  seemed  clear  to  me  that  some- 
one was  inciting  them,  but  whether  Austria,  Italy,  or 
Montenegro,  I  could  not  deteimine. 

In  any  case,  the  poor  tribesmen  would  only  be 
used  as  cat's-paws,  so  I  begged  them  to  be  quiet. 

On  January  30  affairs  took,  to  my  mind,  a  sharp 
turn  for  the  worse.  Since  the  end  of  November  there 
had  been  rumours  of  disagreement  between  the  civil 
governor  (the  Vali)  and  the  military  one  (Hussein 
Riza  Bey).  Now  came  news  that  the  Vali  was  to 
leave  at  once  for  Adana.  I  was  sorry,  for  the  old 
man  had  dealt  honestly  by  me,  and  I  believed  him 
genuinely  anxious  to  keep  the  peace  with  the  Malt- 
sors,  and  fulfil  all  the  conditions  promised  by  the 
Government.  Scutarenes  repeated  their  favourite 
tale  that  only  once  has  Scutari  had  an  honest  Vali^ 
and  he  died  on  the  way,  before  he  arrived.     Never- 

122 


THE  GATIJEEING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS   123 

theless,  even  they  admitted  that  this  one  left  no  richer 
than  he  came. 

Hussein  Eiza  Bey  was,  temporarily,  to  replace  him. 
Had  tlie  kindly  old  Moslem  Bulg.ir  retained  liis  post, 
perhaps  things  might  have  ended  diilerently.  But 
"  what  is  '  egil '  (written  in  the  book  of  Fate)  nuist  be," 
says  popular  voice.  Perhaps  nothing  but  the  inter- 
vention of  all  the  Powers  could  have  changed  the 
current  of  events,  which  quickened  at  once. 

The  same  day  a  deputation  of  headmen  came  to 
tell  me  that  they  had  decided  to  demand  the  full 
payment  of  all  damages,  besides  house  compensation, 
destroyed  beehives,  burnt  and  looted  corn  and  hay, 
damage  to  vineyards,  fruit-trees,  timber,  etc. 

I  combated  long  and  vainly,  said  they  had  received 
as  much  as  could  reasonably  be  expected ;  that  more 
quarrelling  would  only  lead  to  fighting,  and  then 
they  would  lose  all  they  had  gained  and  the  sympathy 
of  Europe  too. 

They  replied  that  with  arms  they  could  do  a  great 
deal;  that  they  had  a  right  to  this  money,  because  it 
was  promised  in  the  twelve  articles,  and  that  they  were 
acting  in  accordance  with  the  advice  of  Generals 
Yanko  Vukotitch  and  Blazho  Boshkovitch !  I 
pointed  out  that  Montenegro  had  thrown  them  over 
last  time,  and  begged  they  would  not  start  another 
futile  and  premature  revolt. 

More  headmen  came,  among  them  Mirash — foxy, 
with  his  little  twinkling  eyes — who  tried  to  wheedle 
me  by  all  his  arts  into  joining  a  sclieme  for  rifle- 
buying.  "  Thou,  oh  my  sister — my  golden  sister — 
thou  canst  if  thou  wilt."  T  swore  by  St.  Nik(da  I 
could   not:   mv   monov   was   j)urelv   for   relief  work. 


124        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

To  prevent,  in  fact,  their  buying  ammunition,  I  was 
giving  only  in  kind  and  not  in  cash.  "  But  it  comes 
from  komits  in  London,''  urged  he.  "  Committee  " 
all  over  the  Near  East  means  only  a  Revolutionary 
Committee.  It  was  waste  of  breath  to  assure  any 
of  them  that  the  Balkan  Committee  was  not  armed 
to  the  teeth,  and  awaiting  only  a  favourable  moment 
to  make  a  raid,  and  had,  moreover,  not  supplied  any 
of  the  money. 

Mirash  counter-swore,  by  a  whole  galaxy  of  saints, 
that  I  could  summon  "  the  English  komits  "  and 
— ^weapons,  too,  if  I  would.  "  See  here,  my  sister, 
about  the  money,  it  is  very  easy.  I  will  sign  a  receipt 
for  maize  distributed  to  the  tribes,  for  you  to  send  to 
London.  And  only  the  Holy  Trinity,  God,  you, 
and  I  will  ever  know  V  And  he  roared  with  laughter. 
I  remained  obdurate. 

They  were  all  going  to  the  Vali,  to  demand  the 
twelve  articles  as  written  and  signed  in  Montenegro. 
"  If  the  Turks  want  peace  they  must  pay  for  it.  If 
not — peace  if  God  wills." 

I  went  straight  to  our  Vice-Consul,  Mr.  Summa, 
and  asked  to  see  his  official  copy  of  the  terms.  My 
impression  was  correct.  There  was  no  clause  which 
could  be  interpreted  into  a  promise  to  pay  all  damages. 
The  heads  had  abeady  been  to  Mr.  Summa  on  the 
subject,  and  we  agreed  that  we  must  stop  trouble  if 
possible.  Off  I  went  to  the  Montenegrin  Consulate 
to  see  if  I  could  get  to  the  bottom  of  the  affair;  told 
Petar  Plamenatz  I  thought  the  demand  a  great 
mistake,  and  asked  upon  what  it  was  founded. 
Petar  enthusiastically  said  the  tribesmen  were  right, 
produced  what  he  said  was  a  copy  of  the  original 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS    125 

document  signed  at  Cettigne,  and  some  French  law 
books,  by  which  to  explain  the  legal  French  in  which 
the  terms  were  drawn  up.  His  version,  and  the 
version  of  the  documents  dealt  out  officially  to  the 
Consulates,  differed  substantially.  All  now  turned 
on  Article  XL  This,  in  the  Turkish  official  version, 
ran,  (XL)  "  Paiement  du  montant  des  maisons  in- 
cendiees,"  and  in  Plamenatz's  copy:  (XL)  "  1\ 
n'existe  pas  pour  le  moment  d'autres  fonds  speciaux 
en  dehors  des  dix  milles  livres  accordes  par  sa  S.M. 
mais  il  va  sans  dii*e,  que  le  Gouvernement  Turque, 
qui  a  decide  de  reconstruire  les  immeuhles  hrnles  ou 
detndts,  poui-vou-a  a  un  supplement  de  credit  dans 
le  cas  ou  ces  dix  milles  livres  seront  insuffisants.'" 

I  was  of  opinion  that  by  "  immeubles,"  houses  only 
were  meant.  Plamenatz,  who  had  taken  a  law 
degi-ee  in  Paris,  intei"preted  it  otherwise,  and  proved 
by  his  dictionary  of  legal  terms  that  **  immeubles  " 
stands  for  all  things  attached  to,  and  belonging  to, 
the  soil,  standing  corn,  thnber,  fruit  on  trees.  Even 
oxen,  if  used  solely  as  plough-oxen,  are  **  immeubles,'' 
as  necessary  to  the  soil. 

I  informed  him  that  "  maisons  "  was  the  word  in 
the  Consular  version  I  had  seen,  and  that  probably 
houses  only  were  intended.  He  vowed  that  not  only 
was  **  immeubles  "  the  word  in  the  version  signed 
by  Saddreddin  Bey  at  Cettigne,  but  that  the  Maltsors 
were  definitely  promised  the  repayment  of  all  damages. 
I  took  a  copy  of  Plamenatz's  version  of  the  whole 
terms.  Either  the  Turks  or  the  Montenegrins  were 
lying.  It  seemed  to  me  to  the  last  degree  unpri)b- 
able  that  the  Turks  should  have  ever  promised  to 
make  good  all  damages.     Now  the  whole  thing  nnist 


126        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

turn   on    a    legal   quibble    as    to    the    meaning   of 
"  inuneubles/' 

I  took  Plamenatz's  version  to  the  British  Vice- 
Consulate.  Mr.  Summa  had  not  previously  seen  it. 
We  compared  it  carefully  with  his  version,  and  I  sent 
copies  of  both  to  London  with  the  comment:  "  My 
great  effort  is  to  prevent  the  Maltsori  being  made 
cat's-paws  of,  to  rake  out  someone  else's  chestnuts." 

On  February  9  an  excited  deputation  of  thirty 
headmen,  including  several  Moslems,  handed  to 
Hussein  Riza  a  demand  for  the  full  payment  of  "  les 
immeubles  " — "  Mublez,  mublez,"  as  they  called 
them — and  for  the  release  of  two  men  who  had  been 
imprisoned,  it  was  declared,  contrary  to  Article  L, 
"  That  a  general  amnesty  has  been  accorded." 

A  stormy  scene  ensued.  Hussein  Riza  denied  all 
knowledge  of  "  immeubles."  The  tribesmen  threat- 
ened hun  that  they  would  have  their  rights.  He  lost 
his  temper. 

Three  headmen  came  to  me  immediately  after- 
wards wildly  excited,  swore  that  all  the  tribes  were 
now  united  except  Mirdita,  which  must  fall  into  line 
with  the  others  soon,  as  the  Mirdites  dreaded  annexa- 
tion either  by  Austria  or  Montenegro;  swore,  too, 
that  they  were  solely  for  autonomy,  and  would  accept 
no  foreign  rule;  that  they  were  in  communication 
with  the  leaders  of  Kosovo  vilayet;  and  that  they 
would  decide  their  course  of  action  in  twenty  days. 

A  great  gathering  of  heads  of  all  the  mountains 
took  place  next  day  in  the  Cathedral,  and  they  swore 
"  besa  "  together.  I  was  not  present,  as  it  was  better 
not  for  me  to  appear  at  a  revolutionary  meeting. 

The  Archbishop  paid  the  expenses  in  Scutari  of  all 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS   127 

the  delegates,  and  a  letter  signed  by  thirty  headmen 
was  sent  to  each  of  the  Consulates  to  "  let  them  know 
we  are  Albanians,  and  mean  to  be  Albanians." 

I  could  not  understand  the  situation.  The  Mon- 
tenegrins, it  w^as  clear,  were  pushing  the  Maltsors 
towards  revolt.  But  the  Maltsors  had  declared 
themselves  for  autonomy.  The  Archbishop,  I  knew 
for  certain,  would  not  accept  Montenegrin  rule.  Yet 
he  was  apparently  encouraging  the  demand  for 
"  immeubles.'' 

On  February  10  wrote  I  to  England:  "  Is  it  possible 
that  Monte negi'O  will  play  for  an  autonomous  Albania, 
thereby  blocking  Austria  ?  The  idea  here  is  (and  in 
Montenegro,  too,  I  believe)  that  Turkey  will  not  last 
long  as  she  is.  It  appears  as  if  all  now  depends  on 
whether  Bulgaria  plays  Austrian  or  Slav.  The  one 
thing  certain  is  that  the  place  is  a  mass  of  intrigue, 
and  the  Maltsors,  if  they  don't  look  out,  will  be  the 
pawns  in  the  game.  Theii*  idea  is  to  strike  for  freedom 
before  anyone  else  can  move  to  annex  them." 

The  immediate  result  of  the  Maltsors'  action  was, 
that  next  day  the  "  telal  "  (public  crier)  went  round 
the  town  proclauning  a  state  of  siege,  and  that  the 
gendarmerie  had  the  right  to  shoot  at  sight  any  man, 
woman,  or  child,  native  or  foreigner,  who  did  not  at 
once  halt  when  bidden  to  do  so.  This  put  the  town 
Christians,  who,  for  the  most  part,  have  not  the  pluck 
of  guinea-pigs,  into  a  state  of  abject  terror,  so  that 
they  postponed  indefinitely  the  Carnival  ball  they 
had  been  preparing,  and  expected  a  massacre  any 
minute.  And  it  infuriated  all  the  Consulates.  The 
French  Consulate  ni  particular  was  enraged,  and 
declared  that  the  French  engineers  could  not  con- 


128        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

tiuue  their  work  on  the  new  roads  till  certain  that 
they  would  not  be  challenged  in  an  unknown  tongue, 
and  shot  down  before  they  knew  what  it  was  about. 

This  was  Hussein  Riza's  first  proclamation  as  Vali. 
He  retracted  in  a  hurry:  explained  first  that  a  baker 
who  supplied  bread  to  the  troops  at  Berditza  had 
entered  the  camp  after  being  forbidden  by  the  sentry, 
who  had  then  fired  at  and  wounded  him.  Conse- 
quently, it  was  advisable  to  warn  the  populace  to 
halt  when  ordered.  Secondly,  he  said  that  that  was 
not  what  he  meant.  The  telal  had  read  it  all 
wrong. 

Next  night  firing  began  from  the  low  hills  beyond 
the  Khi.  Shutters  closed  hastily,  and  the  populace 
rushed  about  the  street  crying,  "  It  has  begun.'^ 
It  was  only,  however,  some  foolish  men  of  the 
Temali-Dushmani  tribe,  who,  angry  because  they 
received  no  maize  from  the  Government,  fii'ed  fifty 
shots  or  so  m  the  aii-,  as  defiance,  childishly.  A  rush 
of  soldiers  from  the  camp  halted  at  the  river's  brink. 
It  was  dusk,  and  they  feared  to  cross  and  be  am- 
bushed. Nor  did  I  go  farther,  for  it  was  too  dark 
to  see. 

The  new  Vali  arrived  on  the  night  of  the  16th. 
We  were  told  he  was  an  Albanian,  and  I  formed  high 
hopes  that  he  would  perhaps  save  the  situation.  As 
a  counter-blast,  I  was  told  that  a  huge  lot  of  contra- 
band rifles  were  expected  shortly  to  arrive  at  Obotti 
in  charge  of  an  Italian  steamboat  captain  who  was 
an  Austrian  subject. 

Spring  was  hard  on  us  now.  The  plum-tree  behind 
the  hotel  burst  into  blossom,  snow-white  and  brilliant 
against  the  mountams.     The  birds  were  shouting  and 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAE-CLOUDS   129 

holloaing,  and  young  men's  fancies  turned  towards 
thoughts  of  revolution. 

On  February  20  the  Sen^ian  Minister,  Gavrilovitch, 
and  the  French  Charge  d'AfEaires,  Monsieur  Cambon, 
arrived  from  Cettigne  "  just  to  take  a  look  round." 
Gavrilovitch  asked  me  about  the  situation.  I  told 
him  I  was  doing  my  best  to  keep  the  tribesmen  quiet. 
He  seemed  much  relieved,  from  which  I  diagnosed 
that  at  any  rate  Sers'ia  was  not  yet  ready  for  the  final 
crash.  He  added  that  much  depended  on  the  result 
of  King  Nikola's  visit  to  Russia;  then  smiled  and  said : 
"  You,  I  suppose,  will  wait  and  watch  developments  V 
When  he  left  he  asked:  "  Have  I  your  permission  to 
report  at  Cettigne  you  are  working  pacifically  ? 
Your  influence  is  of  very  great  importance."  "  You 
exaggerate  it,"  said  I.  He  said:  "Good-bye.  I 
shall  see  you  again  here,  or  " — he  paused — "  or  per- 
haps at  Podgoritza.     Who  knows  ?" 

So  peace  and  war  were  still  in  the  balance.  How 
long  would  Europe  shilly  -  shally  before  acting  ? 
Nikola  of  Montenegro  was  on  his  way  back  from 
Petersburg,  and  was  due  at  Cettigne  to-morrow  or 
the  next  day.  Next  week  war  might  begin.  Why 
did  no  one  intervene  ?  It  seemed  as  though  w^e 
w^ere  drifting  towards  the  edge  of  rapids,  with  no 
branch  to  cling  to. 

If  Europe  were  careless,  the  Turks  w^ere  not. 
Military  work,  which  had  been  going  on  all  the 
winter,  was  being  pressed  forward  quicker  than  ever. 
It  was  said  that  £T60,000  was  being  spent  on  barracks 
alone.  Miles  and  miles  of  coiled  barbed  wire  of 
horrific  quality  had  for  a  long  while  been  arriving 
and  passing  through   the  town.     1   think   it  began 

9 


130        THE  STEUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

coming  as  early  as  October.  Gangs  of  men  went,  to 
the  cheery  strains  of  a  military  band,  to  work  outside 
the  town.  Only  Moslems  were  taken;  but  some 
Christians  assumed  Moslem  names,  and  got  a  tem- 
porary job  in  order  to  learn  what  was  happening,  and 
reported  that  bomb-proof  trenches  and  wire  tangles 
were  being  planned,  and  made,  out  on  Fusha  Stojit. 

Arms  were  dealt  out  secretly  by  the  Government 
to  the  town  and  village  Moslems  at  the  mosques  at 
night.  Thereupon  a  deputation  from  the  neighbour- 
ing Christian  villages  waited  on  the  new  Vali,  and 
complained  and  asked  for  arms,  too.  He  denied 
having  given  arms,  and  the  delegates  cried,  "  Not 
with  your  own  hands,  perhaps  \"  derisively.  The 
new  Vali  made  a  multitude  of  promises.  He  was 
not  really  an  Albanian,  said  report;  had  been  born  in 
Prishtina,  and  never  been  back  since  childhood — "  a 
Tnrk  of  Turks  in  his  heart.'' 

Hussein  Riza,  as  military  commandant,  ordered 
that  the  tribesmen  were  to  give  up  all  the  rifles  they 
had  received  from  Montenegro,  and  have  Turkish 
Mausers  in  exchange — nice  new  smokeless-powder 
rifles;  said  that  he  had  ascertained 'that  2,000  Monte- 
negrin rifles  were  waiting  for  distribution  at  Virbazar, 
and  a  lot  more  at  Dulcigno,  but  would  see  to  it  that 
they  never  came  in.  The  tribesmen  replied  that  they 
had  bought  their  present  rifles  with  their  blood,  and 
would  not  part  with  them.  As  for  his  "  modern 
smokeless-powder  "  weapons,  they  were  probably  a 
lot  of  old  Martinis.     They  would  not  be  swindled. 

I  was  told  that  Montenegro  had  given  money  to  the 
Mirdites,  and  that  Yanko  Vukotitch  was  trying  to 
bribe  some  Moslem  heads  in  Kosovo  vilayet.     Lastly, 


i 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS   131 

that  the  revolution  was  tuued  for  May,  and  that 
plenty  of  weapons  would  be  forthcoming.  Tre- 
mendous enthusiasm  and  hope  were  raised  by  a 
report    that    Italy    had    bombarded    Beyrout    and 


A  MOSQXTE. 


Smyrna,  sunk  some  war  vessels,  and  that  the  Yemen 
was  in  revolt. 

The  British  Minister  and  the  Greek  one  arrived 
from  Cettigne  on  March  1,  also  "  just  to  have  a  look 
round."  "Heavens!"  thought  I;  "now  we've  had 
Serv'ia,  France,  England,  and  Greece.  Things  must 
be  tituppy  !" 

Nikola  of  Montenegro  returned  from  Russia,  and 


132        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

summoned  Hussein  Riza  Bey  to  an  artillery  display 
at  Podgoritza.  Scutari  was  first  stunned  and  then 
derisive  when  told  the  two  had  sworn  peace.  The 
news  threw  the  tribesmen  into  great  uncertamty.  A 
tale  spread  that  Nikola  had  done  it  on  purpose  to  allay 
Hussein  Riza's  alarms,  and  had  shown  him  his  worst 
guns  and  asked  his  opinion  on  them. 

If  Montenegro  remained  quiet,  it  would  be  a  good 
opportunity  for  the  tribesmen  to  rise,  said  some  of 
the  heads.  I  said  it  was  madness.  A  large  propor- 
tion of  the  tribes  were  in  a  state  of  dire  poverty,  and 
none  of  the  burnt-out  ones  had  any  possibility  of 
sowing  corn.  If  there  were  no  harvest,  a  famine 
must  follow.  I  ceased  giving  clothes,  and  began  to 
scrape  up  money  for  seed-corn,  though  how  to  get 
enough  I  had  not  an  idea.  With  seed-corn  in  view, 
too,  the  Maltsors  were  in  a  fever  about  the  payment 
for  "  mublez.'' 

Saddreddin  Bey  was  dismissed  suddenly  from  his 
post  at  Cettigne,  whether  because  he  had  thoughtlessly 
signed  an  ambiguous  document  I  never  ascertained. 

On  Monday,  March  4,  a  large  deputation  of  head- 
men went  to  the  Vali.  He  greeted  them  affably, 
said  he,  too,  was  an  Albanian,  and  asked  what  they 
wanted.  They  replied:  "  The  twelve  articles."  First, 
schools  in  their  own  tongue.  The  Vali  replied  that 
he  had  already  told  the  Archbishop  that  the  priests 
should  be  paid  200  piastres  (about  thirty-six  shillings) 
a  month  to  make  schools  in  their  own  houses.  The 
tribesmen  shouted:  "  We  want  proper  schools,  not 
priests  !"  They  insisted.  The  meeting  became  noisy. 
They  demanded  the  promised  roads.  These,  said  the 
Vali,  were  already  begun.     "  Yes,  artillery  tracks  to 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS   133 

the  tops  of  the  mountains.  We  want  roads  to  our 
valleys."  And  so  they  fought  point  by  point  till  they 
came  to  Ai-ticle  XL,  and  demanded  "  mublez."  Then 
a  terrible  uproar  ensued.  The  Vali  denied  their  claim. 
Mirash  Lutzi's  son  threw  down  a  copy  of  the  Monte- 
negrin version.  The  Vali  wished  to  take  this  copy  of 
the  articles,  but  they  refused  to  give  it  up.  He  lost 
his  temper,  and,  to  quote  an  eyewitness,  "  these  poor 
ignorant  Maltsori,  who  have  never  been  to  school, 
made  as  much  noise  as  though  they  were  educated 
gentlemen  in  a  real  Parliament.'' 

The  deputation  left,  furious.  Some  rushed  ofi  to 
the  Austrian  Consulate,  and  came  away  declaring 
angrily  that  they  had  cried  to  Herr  Zambaur:  "  If  no 
Chi"istian  Power  will  protect  us  from  the  Young  Turks, 
we  shall  be  forced  to  turn  Moslem  \"  and  that  he  had 
replied:  ''Why  don't  you,  then?  What  does  it 
matter  V  What  truth  there  is  in  this  tale  1  do  not 
know,  but  it  flew  round,  was  generally  believed,  and 
caused  much  bitterness.  Others  of  the  deputation 
came  to  me,  very  sullen,  and  as  cross  as  bears.  They 
would  not  listen  to  reason,  but  said:  ''  If  the  Govern- 
ment will  not  keep  its  promises,  so  much  the  worse 
for  the  Government."  And  they  cursed  Austria,  and 
asked:  "Where  are  the  ten  thousand  rifles  Austria 
promised  us  when  Bosnia  was  annexed,  not  one  of 
which  we  ever  received  V 

I  went  to  discuss  the  position  with  Mr.  Summa, 
and  found  Petar  Plamenatz  at  our  Consulate.  ^Ir. 
Summa  maintained  always  that  only  house  com- 
pensation was  ever  meant.  Plamenatz  stuck  to  the 
"  immeubles "  clause,  and  stated  that  until  the 
Turkish  Government  received  the  bill,  it  had  no  idea 


134        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

of  the  mill  which  had  been  wrought.  He  related  that 
on  May  13  he  had  seen  houses  flaming,  and  had  gone 
straight  to  Tourgoud  Pasha  and  asked  hini:  ''Are 
you  mad  ?  What  are  you  doing  ?  You  are  destroy- 
ing your  own  property  I"  But  that  Tourgoud  had 
persisted,  saying  he  was  giving  the  tribesmen  a  good 
lesson.  Plamenatz  could  not  sufficiently  condemn  the 
barbarity  of  house-burning.  I  noted  this  in  my 
diary,  and  later  it  read  strangely.* 

The  Maltsori  held  raging  meetings  in  the  town,  and 
were  about  to  leave  after  a  flat  refusal  of  the  Vali  to 
grant  their  requests,  when  a  man  came  flying  into  the 
town  with  the  news  that  the  road  was  waylaid  with 
armed  Moslems,  and  that  there  was  a  plot  to  assas- 
suiate  the  headmen,  more  especially  Gelosh  Djoko  and 
Mirash  and  his  son.  The  tale  spread  like  flames  that 
the  Vali  had  arranged  this  in  order  to  put  an  end  to 
the  Maltsors'  demands.  They  rushed  to  the  Arch- 
bishop's palace,  spent  the  night  there,  and  sent  angry 
messages  to  the  Vali.  He  declared  he  knew  nothing. 
Every  Christian  in  the  town  believed  that  the  Govern- 
ment had  planned  a  general  assassination  of  the  heads. 
There  was  wild  excitement.  Most  of  them  stayed  a 
couple  of  days  with  the  Archbishop.  Mirash  and 
family  slipped  ofi  by  night;  an  armed  escort  came  to 
meet  the  others. 

The  Christian  inns  at  which  the  tribesmen  always 
stopped  when  in  Scutari  were  closed  by  order  of  the 
police,  to  the  indignation  of  the  whole  Christian  quarter. 

The  Vali,  a  nervous  and  irritable  man,  broke  down 

*  At  the  time  of  going  to  press  news  is  coming  in  that  the 
Montenegrins  are  burning  houses  in  the  districts  they  have  just 
annexed. 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS   135 

and  was  ill.  All  believed  that  really  lie  was  afraid 
to  show  his  face. 

The  die  was  cast.  To  this  day  the  tribesmen 
believe  that  the  Government  tried  to  assassinate 
them,  and  never  again  did  they  place  the  smallest 
faith  in  it.  Revolution  appeared  to  be  merely  a 
matter  of  time.  It  was  to  begin,  we  were  told,  at 
Kroja  and  Avlona,  and  the  Northern  tribes  would 
follow  on.  Essad  Pasha  Toptani,  since  so  notorious, 
came  to  Scutari.  He  had  completely  split  with  the 
Committee  of  Union  and  Progress,  of  which  he  had 
been  a  member,  and  was  now,  so  he  said,  heart  and 
soul  for  Albania.  He  was  working  a  propaganda 
among  the  Scutari  Moslems,  visited,  too,  the  "  Giuha 
Shk}^  "  (Albanian  Language  Club)  of  the  Catholics, 
and  made  a  most  friendly  speech.  It  was  reported 
that  he  was  anxious  to  obtain  the  support  of  a  great 
Power,  especially  England,  and  that  he  was  all  for 
autonomy. 

On  the  10th  Petar  Plamenatz,  the  Montenegrin 
Consul,  was  sunmioned  by  telegraph  to  Constanti- 
nople to  replace  Popovitch  as  Minister  there.  I  was 
surprised,  for,  having  known  him  many  years,  I  did 
not  consider  him  of  sufficient  intellectual  capacity  for 
international  affairs  of  importance,  but  believed  him 
to  have  a  fair  insight  into  the  Albanian  situation,  and 
therefore  valuable  at  Scutari,  for  it  was  certain  that 
Albania  was  the  key  of  the  whole  situation. 

Scarcely  had  he  left,  when  all  Scutari  was  excited 
by  the  news  that  eleven  of  the  Montenegrin  political 
prisoners  of  the  Bomb  Affair  of  1907  had  escaped  by 
burrowing  under  the  walls  of  the  prison  at  Podgoritza, 
fled  to  Tuzi,  and  taken  refuge  with  Mihilaki  ElTendi, 


136         THE  STEUGGLE  FOE  SCUTAEI 

the  Kaimmakam,  who  brought  them  at  once  by 
steamer  to  Scutari.  King  Nikola,  I  was  told  by  a 
Kastrati  man,  sent  at  once  and  offered  £300  reward 
to  any  of  the  Maltsors  who  would  shoot  the  most 
important  of  them — an  ex-Minister.  But  no  one 
rose  to  this  handsome  offer.  I  went  at  once  to  learn 
if  my  poor  friend,  Dr.  Marusitch,  were  among  the 
escaped,  and  to  aid  him  if  possible;  but  he  was  not. 
There  was  widespread  sympathy  with  the  fugitives, 
not  only  in  Albania,  but  in  Montenegro,  and  it  was 
never  discovered  who  aided  their  flight.  They  left 
shortly  by  sea,  but  not  before  the  new  Montenegrin 
Consul,  Jovitchevitch,  had  had  time  to  exchange 
insults  with  them  in  the  street. 

The  appointment  of  Jovitchevitch  puzzled  me  ex- 
tremely. He  was  blankly  ignorant  of  place  and 
people,  and  a  raw  hand  at  Consular  work.  He  came 
to  me  for  a  copy  of  my  copy  of  Plamenatz's  copy  of 
the  celebrated  "  twelve  articles,''  and  the  loan  of  my 
maps,  as  the  Montenegrin  Consulate  possessed  none  ! 
The  copy  I  gave;  my  maps  I  did  not.  He,  as  had 
Popovitch,  complained  that  his  Government  gave  him 
no  instructions,  and  I  could  only  suppose  that  it  was 
hoped  that,  in  his  ignorance,  he  would  tread  on 
Turkish  corns  and  set  the  Turks  a- hopping.  Looking 
back,  I  am  inclined  to  think  the  reason  was  far 
simpler — they  had  no  better  man  to  put  in  his  place. 


CHAPTER  VIII 


THE   REFORM    COMMISSION 
"  It  is  useless  to  lock  the  Stable-door  after  the  Steed  is  Stolen." 

Now,  when  almost  all  Albania,  Moslem  and  Christian, 
was  disaffected,  and  want  and  misery  were  widespread 
in  the  North,  it  occurred  at  last  to  the  Young  Turks 
that  it  would  be  as  well  to  send  a  Commission  to 
mquire  into  the  needs  of  the  country  and  attempt  to 
remedy  them.  Hadji  Avdil,  then  Minister  of  the 
Interior,  with  a  staff  of  Commissioners  which  included 
a  French  Colonel  and  an  Englishman— IMi-.  Graves- 
started  from  Constantinople.  The  news  was  received 
with  derision  in  Scutari.  "  Reform  V  cried  popular 
voice.  "  Not  he.  He  is  only  coming  to  juggle  the 
elections  and  swindle  us  with  promises.  We  have  had 
enough  of  that."  I  protested  that  there  was,  at  any 
rate,  an  honest  Englishman  on  the  Commission,  and 
was  laughed  down.  "  How  can  anyone  be  honest," 
they  asked,  "who  is  in  the  pay  of  the  Young 
Turks?"  ^ 

On  March  19  the  Commission,  much  delayed  by  the 
difficulties  which  it  met  in  Kosovo  vilayet,  where  it 
was  fired  on  more  than  once,  arrived  in  Scutari  with 
considerable  fanfaronade  and  a  salute  of  guns  from 

137 


138        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

the  citadel.  A  party  of  town  Moslems,  in  golden  gala 
attire  and  armed  with  Mausers,  acted  as  escort,  to- 
gether with  a  number  of  soldiers;  but  as  a  show  the 
thing  was  a  failure,  for,  for  some  mysterious  reason, 
the  Commission  was  made  to  dismount  and  tramped 
through  the  muddy  streets  in  draggle-tail  order,  the 
horses  led  in  the  rear  by  suvarris.  The  Moslem 
schoolboys  lined  the  road  at  intervals.  The  Francis- 
cans sent  some  of  their  schoolboys,  by  order,  it  was 
said,  of  the  Austrian  Consul,  and  the  Christian  band 
played — by  order  of  the  Vali.  There  was  no  en- 
thusiasm. 

Mr.  Graves  visited  me  shortly  and  said:  "  I  do  not 
expect  you  to  believe  me,  but  I  assure  you  that  this 
Reform  Commission  is  perfectly  genuine,  that  we 
have  come  to  do  our  best.  The  Government  has 
realized  the  gravity  of  the  situation.  Unless  the 
Chauvinist  party  should  get  the  upper  hand,  and  T 
hope  it  will  not,  the  reforms  will  be  carried  out.'' 
He  gave  details  as  to  the  inefficient  officials  whom  the 
Commission  had  already  dismissed.  I  replied  that 
I  fully  believed  in  the  intentions  of  the  Commission,  but 
that  things  had  arrived  at  such  a  point  that  it  was  too 
late.  Moreover,  it  was  easy  to  dismiss  inefficient 
officials,  but  where  was  it  possible  to  find  suitable 
men  to  replace  them  ?  I  had  no  hope  myself.  Mr. 
Graves  admitted  the  difficulty,  but  said  it  was  not 
insuperable,  and  asked  me  to  make  suggestions  as  to 
the  needs  of  the  Maltsors. 

I  begged  immediately  for  a  distribution  of  seed-corn, 
pointing  out  that  the  twelve  articles  promised  rations 
of  maize  "  until  next  harvest,''  but  that  no  one 
had  explained  how,  in  the  devastated  land,  a  harvest 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS   139 

was  to  be  obtained,  and  that  my  fund  would  allow  of 
a  very  small  distribution  only. 

I  asked  for  maize  for  the  whole  of  the  mountains, 
not  merely  for  the  late  insurgents;  for,  owing  to 
the  general  upset,  all  were  in  great  poverty,  and  those 
who  did  not  receive  it  would  look  on  it  as  a  reward  for 
revolting,  and  act  accordingly.  He  promised  to  do 
his  best,  and  said  that  I  might  tell  the  people  that  the 
destroyed  woods  were  to  be  reckoned  as  "  inomeubles  " 
and  paid  for.  Also  that  the  Government  was  pre- 
pared to  remit  taxation  and  give  exemption  from 
militar}^  service  until  the  reforms  were  carried  out. 
We  discussed  also  the  burning  question  of  the  national 
language,  of  schools,  and  of  the  gendarmerie. 

For  the  next  two  days  I  was  kept  busy  translating 
petitions  into  bad  French  for  presentation  to  Hadji 
Avdil.  One  made  gigantic  demands  and  began  with 
such  a  servnle  address  to  the  Sultan  that  both  I  and 
the  man  who  had  draughted  it  burst  out  laughing. 
"  What  does  it  matter  V  he  said.  "  This  is  the  last 
Turkish  Sultan  here,  and  he  will  not  last  long." 

A  very  good  petition  began  by  pointing  out  that 
Albania  had  been  till  lately  the  faithful  ally  of  Turkey, 
and  in  return  had  only  been  crushed  and  humiliated. 
It  begged  for  (1)  recognition  of  Albanian  nationality, 
(2)  the  use  of  the  Albanian  language  in  police  and 
law  courts  and  all  Government  offices  that  came  in 
direct  contact  with  the  people ;  (3)  the  institution  of 
Albanian  schools  with  Albanian  masters;  (4)  liberty 
to  develop  the  language;  (5)  that  heads  of  Govern- 
ment departments  in  Albania  should  be  Albanians. 

All  was  labour  in  vain.  I  circulated  Mr.  Graves's 
messages  industriously,   and   said   he   would  do   his 


140        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

best.  Folk  merely  smiled,  and  either  disbelieved  it 
or  said  he  would  be  bamboozled  by  the  Turks.  Hadji 
Avdil,  they  pointed  out,  had  gone  first  of  all  to  visit 
Hussein  Bektashi,  who  represented  "  Union  and 
Progress  "  in  Scutari.  "  You  will  see,''  said  everyone, 
"  he  has  only  come  to  arrange  that  two  Young  Turks 
shall  be  elected  for  Parliament.''  And  they  declared 
that  they  would  not  present  any  of  their  petitions,  as 
everything  was  a  foregone  conclusion — when  "  the 
Englishman  "  was  safely  out  of  the  way,  everyone 
who  had  signed  a  petition  would  be  arrested.  Oh, 
yes,  they  knew  all  about  Turks,  young  and  old. 

By  Sunday  the  24th,  all  had  gone  wrong,  and  even 
Mr.  Graves  was  less  hopeful.  One  of  the  main  objects 
of  the  Commission  in  Scutari  had  been  to  make 
peace  with  the  Maltsors,  and  as  yet  the  Minister  and 
the  heads  had  not  met.  He  had  ordered  the  Vali  to 
summon  them,  and  they,  firmly  convinced  that  the 
Vali  had  plotted  to  murder  them  last  time  they  came, 
refused  flatly  to  come  without  a  guarantee  of  safe 
conduct. 

An  Englishman  of  very  great  experience  in  the 
East  once  said:  "  In  a  great  emergency  you  may 
always  trust  a  Turkish  official  to  do  the  wrong  thing." 
Hadji  Avdil  did  so  now.  Had  he  sent  a  genial  per- 
sonal invitation,  had  twenty  sheep  roasted  whole, 
and  held  a  friendly  pow-wow  with  the  chiefs  of  the 
whole  mountains,  it  is  possible  the  whole  course  of 
events  in  North  Albania,  and  therefore  in  Turkey  in 
Europe,  might  have  been  very  different.  But  he 
rode  the  high  horse,  considered  himself  insulted,  and 
ordered  the  Archbishop  to  summon  the  tribesmen. 
The  Archbishop  said  it  was  impossible  after  what  had 


THE  GATHEEING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS   141 

occurred,  unless  a  formal  guarantee  were  given.  Mr. 
Graves  thereupon  offered  his  parole,  and  the  French 
Consul  the  protection  of  his  Consulate,  and  they  asked 
me  if  I  could  act.  I  accordingly  took  council  with  a 
Seltze  headman,  who  said  that  with  a  guarantee  it 
could  be  done,  but  pointed  out  truthfully  that  it  took 
a  whole  week  to  summon  the  outlying  tribesmen.  It 
was  then  Sunday  night.  Mr.  Graves  replied  that  the 
Commission  was  leaving  on  Wednesday,  and  asked 
me  if  I  could  persuade  the  nearer  men  to  come — it 
would  be  better  than  nothing.  As  it  was  precisely 
the  Baitza  men  whose  death  was  said  to  have  been 
planned,  I  hesitated  a  bit,  as,  after  all,  it  was  possible 
that  certain  officials  might  use  Mr.  Graves  as  an 
innocent  lure  and  no  French  Consular  protest  could 
benefit  Mirash  and.  Gelosh  Djoko  if  they  were  shot 
dead  on  the  way.  So  I  said,  if  their  presence  were 
urgent,  I  would  myself  ride  in  and  out  with  them,  if 
it  could  be  arranged,  but  pointed  out  that  one  tribe 
without  the  rest  was  no  good. 

Hadji  Avdil  would  not  unbend  from  his  foolish 
dignity  as  a  Minister.  Mr.  Graves  did  his  best,  but 
none  of  the  Commission  realized  the  absolute  en- 
tirety with  which  all  confidence  in  the  Government 
had  been  destroyed.  In  fact,  the  eleventh  hour  had 
struck,  and  the  minutes  were  flying.  Hadji  Avdil 
and  the  headmen  never  met. 

The  Commission  left  on  the  30th — delayed  because 
the  road  was  "  held  up  " — leaving  trouble  behind  it. 
It  had  confirmed  the  tribesmen  in  the  belief  that  the 
Government  had  plotted  to  murder  them.  It  had 
thereby  ahenat^d  all  the  town  ChristiaiLs.  It  had 
quarrelled  with  the  Archbishop  and  had  triedjto  buy 


142         THE  STEUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

peace  of  the  Mirdites  by  giving  forest-cutting  con- 
cessions to  the  Abbot.  Whether  the  Mirdites  would 
be  pleased  at  learning  the  Abbot  had  the  right  to  cut 
what  they  regarded  as  their  woods  was  an  open 
question. 

The  whole  thing  was  disastrous.  The  important 
influence  to  have  gained  was  the  Archbishop's.  He 
had  acted  quite  honestly  when  he  feared  to  invite 
the  tribes  without   a    formal   guarantee,    but   was 


HOUSE   AS   MILITARY   OUTPOST. 


blamed  by  both  the  Commission  and  the  Austrian 
Consulate. 

A  straw  shows  which  way  the  wind  blows.  I  had 
tried  by  Mr.  Graves's  influence  to  obtain  the  payment 
of  a  debt  of  £T15  to  a  poor  man  whose  house  had  been 
commandeered  by  the  Young  Turks  as  a  military 
guardhouse.  He  had  applied  in  vain  thirty  times 
for  the  promised  rent,  which  was  a  year  overdue. 
Armed  with  a  note  from  Mr.  Graves,  he  applied  again, 
full  of  hope. 

"  Ah,"  said  the  Turkish  oJGScial,  "  this  is  from  the 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS   143 

English  gentleman.  How  kind  of  him  !  When  the 
money  comes,  we  will  let  you  know  !" 

It  never  was  paid — had,  in  all  probability,  been 
embezzled  on  the  way  when  it  was  due.  After  this 
I  could  say  no  more.  For  the  reply  was  always: 
**  Even  your  Englishman  could  not  make  them  pay  a 
debt  of  £T15." 

Scarcely  had  the  Reform  Commission  left — the 
populace  breathing  fervent  prayers  that  it  would  be 
ambushed  at  Kroja — when  it  was  made  public  that 
the  Vali  had  been  dismissed  and  would  be  replaced 
by  Hussein  Riza  Bey,  and  that  Prenk  Pasha  had 
resigned  his  headship  of  Mii'dita.  By  tradition 
Prenk  was  head  not  only  of  Mirdita  but  of  Luria, 
Kthela,  and  the  Alessio  Mountams.  Now,  pre- 
sumably to  restrict  his  influence,  Hadji  Avdil  had 
told  him  that  a  new  distribution  of  provinces  was  to 
take  place,  and  that  in  future  he  could  be  recognized 
only  as  head  of  Mii'dita. 

"  All  or  none,"  said  Prenk  as  an  ultimatum. 

"  None,  then,''  said  Hadji  Avdil. 

Scutari  was  amazed,  and  Prenk,  very  vexed,  said: 
**  Very  well;  whatever  happens,  do  not  put  the  blame 
on  me." 

Prenk  in  the  early  days  of  the  Constitution  had 
loyally  played  "  Union  and  Progress."  So  much  so, 
that  the  Mirdites  began  to  turn  against  him,  and 
accuse  him  of  being  a  Moslem  in  his  heart.  There 
was  no  doubt  about  it,  said  some — he  washed  his  feet 
every  day.  To  regain  lost  influence,  he  was  forced  to 
play  anti-Government,  and  was  suspected  of  having 
instigated  the  refusal  of  the  Mirdite  zaptiehs  to  serve 
the    Government    any    more.     They    had    recently 


144        THE  STEUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

suddenly  disbanded.  At  the  same  time,  Hadji 
Avdil  was  a  fool  to  quarrel  with  Prenk,  for  there  can 
be  no  doubt  that  on  more  than  one  occasion  he  pre- 
vented the  Mirdites  from  rising. 

As  for  the  dismissal  of  the  Vali,  all  the  Maltsors 
and  many  of  the  town  Christians  believed  he  had 
been  dismissed  because  he  had  failed  to  assassinate 
the  headmen,  and  thought  that  they  had  acted  very 
wisely  in  refusing  to  come  down  and  meet  the  Com- 
mission. When  told  of  the  remission  of  taxes,  they 
jeered:  "They  daren't  enforce  them.  We  have 
given  them  one  lesson;  we  will  give  them  another.'' 
And  they  contmued  to  talk  of  autonomy  as  before. 

"  The  Turk,"  they  said,  "  is,  in  one  particular  only, 
like  the  Lord  God.  As  he  was  in  the  beginning  he 
is  now,  and  ever  will  be.  We  don't  believe  in  any  of 
his  reforms.  They  are  only  dust  in  the  eyes  of 
Europe." 

All  argument  was  thrown  away  on  them. 

One  of  the  Moslem  leaders  at  Ipek  sent  me  word 
that  he  had  700  followers,  that  they  would  accept 
neither  Austrian  nor  Turkish  rule,  but  would  like 
English.  Could  I  write  to  the  King  ?  I  replied  it 
was  impossible,  and  I  could  do  nothing. 

The  new  Vali,  Hussein  Riza  Bey,  who  later  played 
such  an  important  part,  was  an  Asiatic.  He  was  a 
short,  dark,  rather  thick-set  man,  with  a  hook  nose 
and  bright,  dark  eyes;  held  himself  badly,  wore  his 
belt  crooked  and  his  tunic  sticking  up  in  a  lump 
above  it  behind,  and  was  imperious  in  manner.  He 
came  from  Bagdad,  where  he  had  a  very  good  record. 
I  had  had  to  act  twice  as  dragoman  to  him  about  the 
construction  of  a  steel  stern-wheeler  steamer  for  the 


I 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS   145 

river,  and  had  found  him,  in  that  aftaii',  such  a  hopeless 
muddler  that  I  underestimated  his  powers  in  his  own 
line  of  business.  As  military  commandant,  too,  he 
had  shown  himself  cruel.  I  regretted  his  appoint- 
ment also,  because  he  was  so  actively  engaged  forti- 
fying the  city  that  he  could  have  little  time  for  civil 
affairs.  Whether,  so  late  in  the  day,  any  civil  gover- 
nor could  have  pacified  the  Maltsors  it  is  impossible 
to  say. 

One  thing  is  certain,  Hussein  Riza  was  a  fine  soldier, 
and  it  is  primarily  to  him  and  his  splendid  plan  of 
fortification  that  the  thanks  of  all  Albanians  are  due. 
He  saved  Scutari.  He  was  trained  by  Germans  and 
knew  his  work. 

The  first  event  of  importance  under  the  new  Vali 
was  the  Parliamentary  election.  This  was  to  take 
place  on  Sunday,  April  14.  Both  town  and  mountain 
Christians  struck  in  a  body.  They  formed  the 
majority  of  the  electorate,  but  declared  that  they 
would  not  vote — the  elections  would  be  all  juggled — 
that  was  the  reason  of  Hadji  Avdil's  visit.  No 
matter  how  many  votes  they  polled,  a  *'  Young 
Turk  "  would  be  declared  elected.  They  would  not 
take  part  in  a  farce;  and  nothing  would  budge  them. 

Polling-day  poured  rain,  snow,  and  sleet.  I  was 
writing  in  my  room  when  a  revolver  shot  rang  out 
close  by.  Leaning  as  far  out  of  the  window  as  pos- 
sible, I  saw  two  more  shots  fired  at  a  Turkish  officer 
(the  second  in  conmiand)  on  horseback.  He  ciashed 
off"  at  a  gallop  uninjured.  There  was  a  rush  of 
gendarmes  and  people,  but  no  arrest  was  made.  The 
assailant  was  a  well-known  Scutari  Moslem,  but  such 
was  the  unpopularity  of  the  Government  that  it  dared 

10 


146        THE  STEUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

not  provoke  the  Moslems  by  capturing  him.     More- 
over, at  bottom  the  affair  was  unsavoury. 

The  election  went  off  without  any  interest.  Only 
ten  Christians  voted — and  they  split  their  votes.  All 
Catholic  Scutarenes  persisted  in  the  belief  that  they 
had  effected  a  great  stroke  of  business  by  refusing  to 
vote,  and  had  shown  the  Turks  what  they  thought  of 
them.  I  thought  them  foolish,  and  said  so.  But 
they  pointed  triumphantly  to  the  results  of  the 
elections  all  over  the  country.  Greeks,  Serbs,  Bul- 
gars — all  had  been  made  to  elect  Young  Turks. 
Seldom  has  an  election  been  so  shamelessly  manipu- 
lated. 

Hussein  Riza  was  greatly  vexed  at  the  attitude  of 
the  Scutari  Christians,  and  tried  hard,  though  the 
election  was  over,  to  put  a  Christian  in.  He  vainly 
tried  to  induce  the  Archbishop  to  influence  his  flock, 
but  the  Archbishop  replied  that  Hadji  Avdil  had  for- 
bidden  him  to  take  any  part  in  politics. 

The  two  Young  Turks,  elected  as  arranged,  were 
declared  members  for  Scutari,  and  the  Christians  of 
the  whole  district  remained  unrepresented. 

Hadji  AvdiFs  visit  had,  so  far,  made  bad  worse.  I 
clung  to  the  hope  that  the  seed-corn  which  I  had 
been  promised  would — come  war,  come  peace — at 
least  save  lives.  It  had  been  bought,  and  the  authori- 
ties sent  for  the  various  headmen  in  order  to  ascertain 
the  names  and  number  of  persons  in  the  families, 
with  a  view  to  fair  distribution. 

I  expected  them  all  to  be  delighted.  Not  at  all. 
They  leapt  to  the  conclusion  it  was  a  plot.  "  The 
Turks,"  they  said,  "  never  gave  a  present  without  a 
reason."     They  believed  the  proffered  corn  was  a 


THE  GATHERING!  OF  THE  AVAR-CLOUDS   147 

"  wooden  horse/'  It  was  a  trick  to  ascertain  how 
much  arable  land  they  had  and  tax  it;  or  to  lure  the 
heads  to  Scutari  and  assassinate  them.  So  com- 
pletely had  all  faith  been  destroyed  that  the  Klimenti, 
who  were  first  approached,  refused  stiffly  to  give  a 
reply.  I  was  horrified,  sent  for  them  at  once,  and 
told  them  the  seed-corn  was  my  idea  and  asked  how 
they  could  live  without  it.  They  replied:  "That 
Englishman  was  in  the  pay  of  the  Turks.  They  sent 
him  to  you  to  trick  us."  All  I  could  do  was  to  send 
an  assurance  of  the  honesty  of  the  affair  to  Padre 
Giacomo,  the  good  old  priest  of  the  tribe. 

Next  day  came  an  old  friend — a  headman  of 
Kastrati  Katun — an  honest  old  chap,  in  complete 
amaze.  "  I  have  come  to  consult  you.  We  need 
this  corn  very,  very  much,  but  we  dare  not  accept  it; 
God  knows  what  trick  is  at  the  bottom  of  it." 

He  was  delighted  with  my  explanation,  and  went  off 
to  tell  Katun  it  was  safe  to  accept. 

With  some  other  tribes  I  had  hicrediblc  difficulties. 
The  heads  went  backwards  and  forwards  from  me  to 
the  British  Consulate.  They  admitted  that  they  had 
nothing  but  starvation  before  them — but  they  feared. 
Mr.  Summa  and  I  talked  ourselves  exhausted,  and  I 
told  them  they  "  were  blackening  my  face  "  before 
they  dared  accept.  If  they  must  stane,  they  must, 
so  they  said ;  it  would  be  better  than  selling  them- 
selves to  the  Turks.  We  persuaded  them  all  in  the 
end,  and  thereby  saved  many  lives.  It  is  one  of  the 
few  things  to  which  1  look  back  with  complete  satis- 
faction. 


CHAPTER  IX 

PLOT   AND    COUNTERPLOT 

Quite  early  in  the  year  I  had  been  told  that  a  great 
general  rising  of  Albania  would  take  place.  It  would 
begin  about  St.  George's  Day  in  Kroja,  Tirana,  and 
Avlona,  and  the  mountain  -  tribes  were  to  rush 
Scutari. 

Meantime,  the  Turks,  directed  by  Hussein  Riza  Bey, 
worked  hard  at  strengthening  Scutari.  I  learnt  in 
May,  by  riding  over  the  plain,  that  works  were  going 
on  in  five  places  at  least,  and  judged  they  were  im- 
portant, as  I  was  warned  off  by  shouts.  Judging, 
also,  by  the  vast  amount  of  barbed  wire  that  was 
always  arriving  and  passing  through  the  town,  I  told 
the  Maltsors  they  could  not  possibly  rush  it,  and  that 
the  attempt  would  be  suicidal.  They  jeered  at  me 
and  the  barbed  wire,  but  told  me  nothing  would  take 
place  till  the  end  of  June. 

That  Tarabosh  was  becoming  extremely  strong 
we  learnt  by  chance.  The  Turkish  officers  stole  a 
very  good  sporting  dog  belonging  to  a  man  I  know. 
He  complained  to  the  Vali,  and  said  the  dog  had 
been  seen  at  Tarabosh.  The  Vali  denied  it.  The 
dog's  master  persisted,  and  finally  obtained  leave, 
not  to  go  himself,  but,  to  send  his  servant.  The 
latter,  a  sharp  lad,  returned  with  the  dog  and  a 
description  of  the  fort. 

148 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS   149 

I  wanted  a  holiday  badly,  and  also  clothes.  More- 
over, it  was  advisable  for  me  to  leave  the  country, 
at  any  rate,  for  a  time.  The  tribesmen  would  not 
take  my  advice,  though  they  were  always  coming 
for  it.  And  when  the  "  burst  up  "  came,  I  did  not 
wish  to  be  considered  responsible.  So  at  the  end 
of  May  I  left  Scutari  for  Rome.  The  situation  be- 
tween Turkey  and  Montenegro  was  already  badly 
strained,  owing  to  a  quarrel  about  steamboat  rights 
on  the  lake.  All  steamer  traffic  between  the  two 
countries  was  stopped,  and  things  looked  as  though 
they  might   develop   uncomfortably.     It   being  im- 


possible to  travel  via  Montenegro,  I  had  to  go  to 
Corfu,  and  tranship  for  Brindisi. 

In  Rome,  to  my  surprise,  I  was  invited  almost  at 
once  to  speak  with  the  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs, 
the  Marchese  San  Giuliano.  The  political  situation 
puzzled  me  extremely. 

Nikola  of  Montenegro  had  apparently  failed  to 
obtain  Russian  support.  But  it  was  obvious  that 
Montenegro  was  stirring  up  perpetual  unrest  among 
the  mountain-tribes.  There  were  more  rumours  that 
"  this  time  Montenegro  will  give  us  enough  arms  to 
free  ourselves."  Now  there  was  the  lake-steamer 
quarrel,  and  a  company  financed  by  Italy  was  mixed 


150        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

up  in  it.  I  believed  that  Italy  must  be  the  motive- 
power  behind  Montenegro,  for  I  could  not  believe  she 
would  act  alone. 

The  Marchese  and  I  talked  round  and  round  for  a 
little  while,  for  we  were  naturally  both  more  anxious 
to  obtain  information  than  to  give  it.  Then  he  asked : 
"  Well,  in  your  opinion,  will  the  Maltsors  of  Scutari 
mountains  rise  this  year  or  not  ?" 

"  It  depends,"  said  I,  ''  on  Montenegro."  He 
looked  so  genuinely  surprised  that  I  said  to  myself 
at  once:  "No;  Italy  is  not  engineering  this 
affair." 

"  What  do  you  mean  by '  depends  on  Montenegro  '  ?" 
he  asked. 

'*  Well,  I  think  it  does,"  I  repeated.  I  was  now 
pretty  certain  how  things  stood.  It  was  not  Italy 
and  not  Russia  that  was  shoving.  So  it  must  be 
the  other  Balkan  States. 

The  tale  that  Bulgaria  would  begin  so  soon  as 
Montenegro  did,  must  be  true.  That  Montenegro 
meant  business  was  evident;  for  Popovitch,  the 
Montenegrin  Minister  in  Rome,  told  me  that  the 
Montenegrin  Cabinet  was  dissolved,  and  that  Mitar 
Martinovitch  was  the  new  War  Minister.  "  Now 
we  shall  have  war,"  he  added. 

To  my  mind  the  weak  point  was  Greece.  Ten 
years  ago  in  Macedonia  I  had  seen  for  myself  the 
hatred  that  raged  between  Greek  and  Bulgar — a 
hatred  so  intense  and  so  savage  that  it  amounted  to 
mania,  and  it  was  hard  to  believe  that  union  between 
the  two  was  possible. 

I  returned  Scutari-wards  at  the  beginning  of  July, 
travelling  through  Montenegro. 


THE  GATHEEING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS   151 

Podgoritza  was  hard  at  work  taking  in  military 
stores  and  drilling  men.  For  Montenegro,  a  great  lot 
of  men  were  mobilized.  The  ordinary  man  wanted 
war,  and  talked  of  little  else.  The  situation,  as  I 
wrote  at  the  time,  "  was  sickish." 

Blazho  Boshkovitch  had  gone  to  Cettigne  for 
orders.  So  had  the  Montenegrin  Consul  from  Scutari. 
The  Turkish  Consul  took  the  blackest  possible  view 
of  the  state  of  things,  and  the  Moslems  of  Kosovo  were 
in  full  revolt. 

H  the  Maltsors  rose,  I  should  not  be  able  to  get  to 
Scutari  to  fetch  my  remaining  goods,  so  off  I  went  at 
once  across  country.  Scutari  I  found  jumpy  and 
nervous.  War  preparations  were  going  on  fast. 
Hussein  Eiza  Bey  did  not  mean  to  be  caught  napping. 
But  reports  of  Albanian  victories  came  from  Kosovo 
vilayet,  and  the  telegraph-line  to  South  Albania  was 
cut. 

A  bright  idea  flashed  across  me,  and  off  I  went  to 
the  old  Greek  Consul,  with  whom  I  was  on  friendly 
terms.  We  talked  on  general  topics.  Then  I  asked 
suddenly,  and  apropos  of  nothing  at  all:  "  Is  it  true, 
Moasieur,  that  your  Government  has  signed  a  Treaty 
with  Bulgaria  against  Turkey  V'' 

He  jumped  visibly,  and,  greatly  upset,  began: 
"  Mademoiselle,  you  must  surely  be  aware  that  all 

Governments  have  affairs  which  one  must  not " 

I  apologized,  and  begged  him  to  say  no  more.  Nor 
was  more  required.  If  it  were  not  signed,  it  was 
about  to  be.  The  last  straw  had  been  laid.  War 
was  now  as  certain  as  is  anything  in  this  world. 

I  decided  to  leave  Scutari,  calculating  that  both 
postal  routes  would  be  cut  (via  Medua  and  via  Mon- 


152        THE  STRUGGLE  FOE  SCUTARI 

tenegro),  and  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  send  or 
receive  news. 

It  was  July  17.  Next  day  came  news  of  a  very 
sharp  fight  between  Turkish  regulars  and  Monte- 
negrins, on  the  frontier  at  Matagushi,  not  far  from 
Podgoritza.  It  had  lasted  seven  hours.  The  Mon~ 
tenegrins  had  lost  nine  dead  and  six  wounded,  and 
the  Turks  rather  less. 

The  Montenegrin  Consul,  who  had  just  returned, 
was  greatly  agitated.  "  Mon  Dieu  !"  he  said  to  me, 
"  I  hope  you  will  not  publish  a  book  before  five 
years.     You  know  too  much." 

Popular  voice  said:  ''  Montenegro  will  declare  war." 
A  quarrel  of  some  sort  must  be  picked  as  prelude,  and 
it  was  possible  this  was  the  one.  I  packed  and  left 
Scutari. 

Passing  through  Tuzi,  the  frontier  town,  I  called 
on  Mihilaki  Effendi,  the  Kaimmakam.  He  said  the 
affair  was  purely  local:  some  Montenegrins  had 
passed  the  frontier  carrying  arms,  had  been  ordered 
by  the  frontier  patrol  to  give  them  up,  had  refused, 
and  been  fired  on.  It  was  a  pity,  but — "  Que  voulez 
vous — the  usual  frontier  incident  with  which  these 
people  amuse  themselves."  I  told  him  that,  in  view 
of  the  general  situation,  I  hoped  that  the  Maltsors 
would  not  rise.  They  had  better  wait  till  they  had 
learned  more,  before  they  struck  for  autonomy. 
He  agreed,  and  said  he  had  done  his  best  (which  was 
true.  He  had  worked  very  well).  But  he  was  not 
at  all  hopeful,  as  there  were  Montenegrin  intriguers 
at  work. 

Podgoritza  I  found  raging.  In  summer  it  is  always 
a  small  Inferno,  and  with  excitement,  had  leapt  to 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS   153 

fever  heat;  the  popular  pulse  was  anything  you 
please.  Unarmed  Montenegrins,  so  everyone  swore, 
had  been  fired  at  when  on  their  own  territory. 
Turkish  soldiers  and  bashi-bazouks  had  crossed  the 
frontier  300  metres.  Of  the  nine  Montenegrins  killed, 
four  had  been  mutilated.  The  Turkish  Consul  had 
had  to  bear  witness  to  this  fact. 

I  did  not  agree  with  the  Kaimmakam  that  this  was 
"  a  usual  frontier  incident,"  and  believed  it  to  be 
"  a  put-up  job  "  by  one  side  or  the  other,  but  was  not 
sure  which  had  the  more  to  gain  by  it.  When 
Monsieur  Ramadanovitch  came  to  investigate  the 
circumstances,  I  suggested  to  him  that  the  Turks 
had  perhaps  tried  to  make  a  war  scare,  as  they  were 
greatly  bothered  by  the  Moslem  insurrection  that  was 
raging  in  Kosovo  vilayet,  and  if  the  insurgents 
thought  war  with  Montenegro  imminent,  they  would 
make  peace  at  once,  and  combine  with  the  Turk 
against  the  Slav.  Ramadanovitch  agreed,  and  added 
that,  for  that  very  reason,  Montenegro  must  keep 
quiet. 

I  noted  that  day  in  my  diary:  "  Montenegro  wants 
to  let  the  Turks  and  the  Kosovo  Albanians  fight 
themselves  tired  before  taking  any  active  steps." 

War  fever  was  so  high  that  it  seemed  advisable  to 
stay,  though  Podgoritza  was  suffocatingly  hot. 

The  Government  ordered  that  no  owner  of  a  horse 
was  to  sell  it  without  permission.  The  guns  were  all 
ready. 

"  Wait  and  see  the  first  shot  fired,"  said  the  people. 
I  waited  a  week,  during  which  nothing  happened,  and 
I  received  a  message  from  the  tribesmen,  saying  they 
had  not  enough  cartridges  nor  rifles,   and  did  not 


154        THE  STEUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

know  what  to  do  if  a  crisis  arose.  They  begged 
help. 

I  went  up  to  Cettigne  for  a  breath  of  fresh  air. 
The  first  thing  I  did  was,  accidentally,  to  meet  the 
King  and  Queen  driving  in  their  pony- carriage.  His 
Majesty  at  once  stopped  and  summoned  me.  After 
greeting  me  he  said: 

"  Absolutely  you  must  go  and  tell  your  Maltsors 
that  they  must  not  rise  now."  I  was  considerably 
embarrassed,  for  this  clearly  meant  that  he  intended 
them  to  rise  later  for  his  own  purposes.  I  said, 
''  Sire,  I  have  already  told  them  they  have  not  enough 
cartridges,  and  can  do  nothing";  and  I  added: 
''  But  they  will  not  wait  for  anyone." 

He  expressed  himself  as  very  pleased  with  the 
advice  I  had  given ;  said  I  was  younger  and  more 
beautiful  each  time  he  saw  me,  and  drove  away, 
leaving  me  wondering  that  His  Majesty  should  attempt 
to  catch  such  an  old  Balkan  bird  as  myself  with  chaff 
of  that  sort . 

Next  day  I  had  a  message  from  a  very  important 
Maltsor,  saying  he  must  speak  to  me  in  private  on 
something  of  the  highest  importance.  I  arranged 
the  meeting.  He  spoke  very  earnestly,  and  said  he 
had  come  on  behalf  of  the  Maltsors,  to  beg  that  I 
would  write  to  England  and  explain  their  situation. 
I  transcribe  the  main  points  of  his  statement,  for  it 
throws  a  strong  light  on  subsequent  events: 

"  We  believe  that  in  five  years'  time,  by  constant 
struggles,  we  should  be  able  to  fight  free  and  make 
our  own  terms  with  the  Turks.  But  Austria  has 
had  her  plans  formed  for  God  knows  how  many  years, 
and  does  not  mean  to  give  them  up.     King  Nikola 


THE  GATHER! XG  OF  THE  WAE-CLOUDS  155 

also  has  his.  His  plan — and  I  swear  to  you  that  this 
is  true — is  to  take  all  Maltsia  e  madhe,  Bukagini  and 
Mirdita.  He  is  very  careful  to  want  to  take  only 
a  population  less  than  Montenegro.  He  does  not 
want  an  Albanian  majority,  for  he  wants  to  crush 
and  Slavize  all  that  he  takes.  He  planned  this  last 
year,  but  though  a  certain  party — that  led  by  Sokol 
Batzi—  was  in  favour  of  Montenegrin  rule,  the  majority 
were  not.  This  is  the  reason  why  Montenegro  gave 
out  no  more  arm^;  and  did  not  advance.  He  knew 
we  would  not  accept  him.  For  the  help  we  received 
last  year  we  are  truly  grateful.  But  we  made  no 
promises.  It  was  fear  that  Albania  might  be  divided 
and  part  given  to  Montenegro,  that  prevented  the 
Moslems  of  Kosovo  and  the  Tosks  from  rising  with 
us  last  year.  Perhaps  it  was  a  mistake,  for  had  they 
risen,  Europe  then  might  have  recognized  us.  What 
we  wish  you  to  write  to  England  now  is — That  King 
Nikola  has  7nade  a  flan  that  will  ruin  us.  He  is  doing 
all  he  can  to  prevent  Maltsia  e  madhe  from  rising 
till  he  is  ready.  He  wants  it  to  rise  as  he  advances, 
and  make  Europe  think  it  is  under  his  control  and 
wants  his  rule.  We  are  placed  between  three  enemies 
—Turkey,  Austria,  and  Montenegro.  The  only  way 
we  can  spoil  his  plan  is  to  rise  now  and  help  the 
revolution  in  Kosovo  vilayet.  If  we  fall  under 
Montenegro  or  Austria,  it  is  death  for  us  as  a  nation. 
So  we  may  as  well  rise  and  be  killed— or  win,  God 
willing." 

I  asked,  "  What  about  arms  and  ammunition  ?" 
and  he  admitted  they  were  very  short  of  ammunition, 
but  that  there  were  not  more  than  15,000  Xizams 
around  Scutari,  and  that  all  the  Christian  ones  would 


156         THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

desert;  also  that  the  Scutari  Moslems  were  sick  of 
the  Turks  and  would  rise,  too.  The  Kosovo  Moslems 
were  capturing  quantities  of  ammunition  from  the 
Turks,  "  and  we  can,  too;  it  would  be  better  than 
accepting  more  help  from  Montenegro." 

I  feared  a  fiasco.  He  said:  "  It  would  be  better  to 
wait  fifteen  years  perhaps,  under  Turkey,  till  we  are 
more  educated  for  autonomy,  but  it  is  impossible. 
We  know  for  certain  that  Austria's  and  Montenegro's 
plans  are  complete,  and  will  soon  be  in  motion.  We 
must  act  first  and  show  Europe  we  are  quite  indepen- 
dent of  these  two.  Say  to  the  British  Government 
that  if  it  will  not  help  us  we  beg  that  it  will  not  help 
our  enemies,  either  with  money  or  political  support. 
We  beg  that  you  will  stay,  for  this  time  we  shall  need 
your  help  more  than  ever.  As  for  me,  I  can  think 
no  longer  of  my  family,  but  only  of  my  Fatherland." 
Nor  was  this  an  idle  boast,  for  he  had  fought  very 
bravely  throughout  the  insurrection.  He  spoke 
rapidly,  and  was  tense  with  excitement  and  concen- 
trated hate.  Later  he  brought  some  others  to  confirm 
his  statements,  and  they  all  left  shortly  for  the  front. 

From  this  moment  I  considered  myself  definitely 
pledged  to  stand  by  the  Maltsors  in  the  coming  struggle 
as  I  had  done  in  the  past. 

That  same  afternoon  Miouskovitch  gave  me  a  most 
graphic  account  of  the  frightful  "  sitting  on  "  that 
King  Nikola  and  his  suite  got  in  Russia,  when  they 
went  there  hoping  for  support.  "  It  was  terrible, 
mademoiselle  !  They  threatened  us  with  annihila- 
tion !" 

The  King  had  behaved  with  his  usual  astuteness, 
but  poor  Dushan  Gregovitch  had  succumbed  to  the 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS   157 

popular  craze  for  being  interviewed,  and  had  confided 
to  a  newspaper  that  war  was  necessary  for  Montene- 
gro; she  must  have  this,  that,  and  the  other,  and 
meant  to  have  them  at  an  early  date. 

The  Tsar,  in  wrath,  demanded  of  King  Nikola  the 
meaning  of  this,  and  he  unkindly  replied  that  no  one 
ever  believed  Gregovitch.  It  was  hard  on  poor  Grego- 
vitch,  for  he  really  had  spoken  the  truth  this  time. 

On  Monday,  July  30,  came  word  to  me  that  the 
Maltsors,  in  accordance  with  the  determination  they 
had  already  expressed,  had  risen,  had  stopped  a 
Turkish  convoy  of  thirty-two  Nizams,  captui'ed  all 
their  arms,  and  seventeen  loaded  mules.  Two  days 
later  the  Klimenti  tribe  drove  all  the  soldiers  out  of 
their  land  and  captured  the  stores  of  a  whole  camp. 
A  letter  informed  me  of  an  elaborate  plan  for  a  com- 
bined attack  on  Scutari  and  many  other  details. 
News  from  Kosovo  was,  that  the  insurgents  were 
carrying  all  before  them,  that  they  had  demanded 
the  dissolution  of  Parliament  and  a  fair  election,  and 
had  given  the  Government  forty-eight  hours  in  which 
to  make  up  its  mind. 

It  was  August  2,  the  anniversary  of  the  great 
betrayal  of  last  year.  Looking  back,  I  wondered 
how  I  had  got  through  the  strain  and  misery  of  that 
week.  And  the  situation  was  in  no  way  better; 
there  was  more  trouble  ahead. 

On  the  4th  came  men  of  Shala  to  me,  praying 
for  arms,  and  an  appeal  for  ammunition  from  Kas- 
trati.  All  the  Dukagin  tribes  together  had  but 
2,000  rifles,  1,500  of  which  were  those  given  last  year 
by  Montenegro.  They  said,  too,  that  a  whole  bat- 
talion of  Montenegrins  had  gone  up  to  the  frontier 


158        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

from  Kuchi,  and  had  had  a  fight  with  the  Turks. 
They  were  vexed  that  Montenegro  should  already  be 
beginning  before  the  Albanian  question  was  decided. 

It  was  as  I  feared.  Again  the  tribesmen  had  risen 
without  sufficient  means.  In  spite  of  the  constant 
rumours  of  contraband,  I  knew  that  very  few  weapons 
had  actually  come  in,  and  that,  as  Austria  wished  the 
Maltsors  to  keep  the  peace,  the  supply  was  practically 
cut  off.  Albania  had  never  been  re-armed  properly 
since  the  surrender  of  arms  in  1910. 

I  said  it  was  absolutely  impossible  for  me  to  help 
with  weapons.  They  were  greatly  disappointed,  as 
they  clung  always  to  the  belief  that  England  had 
helped  the  other  Balkan  peoples  to  obtain  freedom 
and  would  help  them. 

The  insurgent  leaders,  meanwhile,  were  desperately 
anxious  lest  the  Kosovo  Moslems  should  accept  terms 
from  the  Turkish  Government  which  did  not  include 
all  Albania.  It  was  now  or  never,  they  said,  the 
time  for  all  Albania  to  strike  and  be  recognized  as  a 
nation.  Dervish  Bey,  of  Elbasan,  was  reported  to 
be  on  the  warpath,  and  bands  of  patriots  were  making 
ready  at  Kortcha.  There  were  several  good  leaders 
down  South,  only  I  was  begged  to  note  that  no  one 
in  the  North  had  any  belief  at  all  in  Ismail  Kemal, 
and  all  would  refuse  to  recognize  him,  as  they  believed 
he  was  not  really  a  patriot,  but  would  betray  them 
to  a  foreign  Power. 

By  this  time  Cettigne  was  in  great  excitement. 
The  rumour  of  a  frontier  fight  was  true.  A  battle 
had  taken  place  at  Mojkovach,  in  the  Kolashin  dis- 
trict, on  August  3. 


THE   GRrS-XIKG   FRONTIER. 


CHAPTER  X 


THE  LAST  SCENE  OF  THE  FOURTH  ACT 

Before  telling  of  the  last  bloody  scene  of  the  pre- 
war era,  I  must  briefly  describe  the  Turko-Montene- 
grin  frontier.  Someone  in  the  diplomatic  service  once 
told  me,  "  In  drawing  frontiers  the  ethnographic 
question  is  not  considered,"  which  is  just  a  diplomatic 
way  of  saying,  ''  You  grab  the  land  with  the  livestock 
on  it,"  and  ignores  the  fact  that  when  a  foreign  body 
is  thus  incorporated,  it  almost  invariably  creates  pus, 
which  has,  sooner  or  later,  to  be  let  out  by  an  opera- 
tion. 

The  frontiers  drawn  by  the  Treaty  of  Berhn  were 
so  impossible  that  in  many  places  they  could  not  be 
defined,  much  less  enforced.  As  the  borderers  them- 
selves described  it,  ''  The  frontier  floated  on  blood." 

The  ethnographic  question  can  never  be  safely 
ignored.     Alsace  is  still  an  open  sore  in  Germany. 

The  more  recent  frontiers  of  the  Treaty  of  London 
have  already  been  washed  out  by  blood,  and  the  future 
will  show  how  much  of  the  Bucharest  frontiers  can 
stand  that  gory  laundry. 

By  the  Treaty  of  Berlin  solid  Albanian  districts, 

159 


160        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

which  hated  all  things  Slav,  were  handed  over  to 
Montenegro,  and  solid  Slav  districts,  which  asked 
nothing  better  than  to  be  Montenegrin  or  Serb,  were 
handed  over  to  the  Turkish  Empire.  Worse,  if  pos- 
sible, tribes  and  groups  of  tribes  were  divided,  and  this, 
in  a  tribal  land,  should  be  avoided  at  almost  any  price. 
Debatable  tracts  were  strewn  all  along  the  Montene- 
grin frontier.  The  site  of  the  recent  Matagushi  affair 
was  one. 

It  was  further  claimed  by  the  Montenegrins  that 
the  Turks  had  not  only  built  kulas  (blockhouses)  upon 
debatable  areas,  but  had  thrown  up  entrenchments 
over  the  frontier-line,  and  that  from  these  kulas  the 
frontier  Nizams  incessantly  "  sniped  "  Montenegrins 
who  were  upon  their  own  land.  The  contested  areas, 
it  should  be  remarked,  were  mostly  cases  in  which 
the  Berlin  frontier  had  been  drawn  between  a  village 
or  tribe  and  its  pasture-land. 

In  July  a  Turko-Montenegrin  Commission  was  ap- 
pointed to  rectify  and  delimit  these  frontiers. 

The  biggest  of  the  Berlin  blunders  was  that  the 
large  Slav  tribe  Vassoievitch  was  cut  in  half.  Nothing 
biib  very  liberal  concessions  on  either'side  and  care- 
fully reckoned  compensations  could  ever  have  recti- 
fied that  frontier. 

This  Commission,  instead  of  visiting  the  spots,  de- 
cided everything  on  paper  with  the  aid  of  maps — an 
extraordinary  piece  of  Turkish  slopdawdle  at  such  a 
critical  moment.  In  truth,  the  thing  was  a  farce. 
Montenegro,  in  all  probability,  insisted  on  it  in  order 
to  drive  in  one  more  peg  on  which  to  hang  war.  The 
Turks,  on  their  part,  if  they  wished  peace,  should 
have  insisted  on  a  delimitation  by  foreign  inspectors. 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS    161 

Pending  the  ratification  of  this  paper  frontier  by 
the  Turkish  Government,  neither  party  was  to  have 
the  right  to  occupy  the  debatable  portions  with 
mihtary.  Such  was  the  position  of  affairs  when  the 
fight  took  place  at  Mojkovach  at  the  beginning  of 
August. 

Cettigne  was  bubbling  with  wrath,  but  the  authori- 
ties were  chary  of  giving  details ;  nor  was  it  till  some 
time  after  that  I  got  what  I  believe  to  be  a  true  ac- 
count from  an  eyewitness  ;  briefly  thus:  "  The  Monte- 
negrin peasants  were  sent  to  mow  grass  near  the 
frontier.  As  they  had  been  fired  at  when  they  had 
tried  to  mow  there  before,  some  gendarmes  went  with 
them.  The  Nizams  opened  fire  from  the  kula  at 
once.  The  gendarmes  summoned  troops,  who  were 
waiting  near  in  case  of  need.  These  came  with  such 
a  mad  rush  that  they  surrounded  the  kula  before  the 
Nizams  had  time  to  fire,  and  crowded  so  close  against 
the  walls  that  it  was  impossible  to  fire  down  on  them 
from  the  loopholes.  Yelling  their  war-songs,  they 
demanded  the  surrender  of  the  garrison.  Someone 
rushed  from  a  neighbouring  house  with  a  can  of 
petroleum,  and,  dodging  the  fire,  got  to  the  kula 
with  it.  A  Montenegrin  stripped  off  his  shirt,  dipped 
it  in  petroleum,  and  thrust  it,  burning,  to  the  wooden 
roof.  This  blazed  up,  some  ammunition  exploded, 
and  the  Nizams  had  to  rush  out.  More  Nizams  and 
some  Moslem  Albanians  rushed  to  the  rescue  from  over 
the  border;  they  all  fought  like  wild  beasts.  A 
Nizam  rushed  out  all  in  flames  and  was  shot  down. 
The  kula  was  burnt  down.  I  saw  at  least  seventy 
corpses  round  it.  The  Montenegrins  were  mad  with 
rage;  they  cut  the  noses  off  their  fallen  foes,  put 

11 


162        THE  STRUGGLE  FOE  SCUTARI 

them  in  their  pockets,  and  followed  the  retreating 
Turks  in  a  wild  rush  almost  to  Bijelopolje,  15  kilo- 
metres over  the  frontier.  They  lost  twenty-two 
killed  and  thirty- two  wounded.  A  wounded  Turk 
was  taken  alive;  but  at  night  a  Montenegrin  recog- 
nized him  as  the  man  who  had  killed  his  father,  and 
bashed  his  head  in.  Altogether  four  kulas  were 
burnt.  The  Montenegrins  had  over  three  thousand 
men  in  the  field." 

Later  a  Kolashin  man  told  me  that  it  had  been 
intended  to  take  Bijelopolje,  and  the  hour  and  the 
day  had  been  all  planned,  and  that  it  would  have 
been  forced  to  surrender,  had  not  the  troops  been 
hastily  recalled,  owing  to  representations  made  by 
some  of  the  Legations  at  Cettigne. 

The  Turkish  Minister,  Rustem  Bey  (otherwise 
Bilinski)  demanded  an  apology  for  the  violation  of 
Turkish  territory,  admitting  that  the  land  was  de- 
batable, and  that  the  Turks  had  entrenched  it,  but 
denying  Montenegro's  right  to  invade  with  troops; 
and  added  that  if  he  did  not  receive  the  apology  by 
8  p.m.  on  August  6,  he  would  break  off  diplomatic 
relations  and  leave  the  country. 

Montenegro  refused,  and  almost  immediately  after- 
wards the  Kaimmakam  of  Berani,  in  whose  district 
the  fight  had  taken  place,  telegraphed  apologies  to 
the  Montenegrin  Government,  and  stated  that  the 
Nizams  had  fired  the  first  shot. 

King  Nikola,  jubilant,  sent  for  a  gusle  and  played 
national  airs,  and  then  rode  round  Cettigne  on  his 
white  horse.  That  the  affair  was  *'  a  put-up  job  " 
to  force  Turkey  to  declare  war  there  can,  in  the  light 
of  subsequent  events,  be  little  doubt.     Montenegro 


THE  GATHERIXG  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS   163 


trailed  her  coat  and  Turkey  trod  on  it.  But  it  is 
also  possible  that  Turkey's  part  was  played  deliber- 
ately, for  it  was  very  certain  that  in  case  of  war  with 
Montenegro  the  Moslems  of  Kosovo  would  make  peace 
and  play  Turkish  for  the  nonce,  in  hope  to  save  their 
territory,  and  obtain  further  concessions  later. 

Be  that  as  it  may,  the  Turks  acceded  to  the  de- 
mands of  the  insurgent  Kosovo 
Moslems,  dissolved  Parliament, 
and   promised   a    form   of   au- 
tonomy. 

The  ^lontenegrins  were  not 
at  all  pleased  w^ith  this  news, 
but  I  found  Gavrilovitch  (the 
Servian  Minister)  and  MitarMar- 
tinovitch,  now  War  Minister, 
both  still  confident  that  all  the 
Catholic  Maltsors,  Maltsia  e 
madhe,  Dukagini,  and  Mirdites 
would  support  Montenegro.  I 
denied  this.  Martinovitch  would 
not  believe  me;  but  Gavrilo- 
vitch seemed  shaken. 

The  Maltsia  e  madhe  men, 
meanwhile  in  full  revolt,  w^ere 

greatly  put  out  by  the  failure  of  the  Kosovo 
men  to  consult  the  Christians  before  making  terms. 
They  had  captured  and  disarmed  all  the  small  mili- 
tary outposts  in  Klimenti  and  Gruda,  and  taken 
their  stores  and  ammunition,  and  were  besieging 
Bukovitz,  the  one  big  Turkish  camp  in  Hoti.  Owing 
to  its  lack  of  water,  it  was  bound  to  surrender  in  a 
few  days.     A  relief  force  from  Scutari  was  routed  by 


A   Q0SLR. 


164        THE  STEUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

a  combined  force  of  Hoti,  Kastrati,  and  Skreli.  Tuzi 
was  completely  cut  off  from  Scutari  and  short  of 
supplies,  and,  so  far  as  I  could  learn,  all  the  tribes 
except  Gruda,  which  was  influenced  by  Sokol  Batzi, 
were  entirely  for  Albanian  independence. 

The  Turkish  Government  sent  the  Archbishop  to 
the  mountains  to  negotiate  peace.  He  succeeded  in 
making  all  the  insurgents,  except  Gruda  and  Shala, 
swear  peace  on  condition  the  Turks  evacuated  the 
mountains.  The  Turkish  troops  accordingly  with- 
drew from  all  points,  except  the  summit  of  Dechich 
and  Planinitza,  a  fortified  camp  on  its  flank,  which 
they  declared  necessary  as  frontier  outposts.  The 
Montenegrins  were  furious  that  the  tribesmen  had 
made  peace,  and  declared  it  was  an  Austrian  "  politik." 

War  preparations  went  on  apace  in  Podgoritza. 
Rifles  were  dealt  out  to  young  and  aged.  On 
August  12  artillery  went  to  Kolashin  and  Suka,  and 
I  noted:  "  Montenegro  has  no  preparations  at  all 
for  field  ambulance,  let  alone  hospitals."  The  few 
wounded  Albanians  who  came  into  Podgoritza  were 
shamefully  neglected  and  in  most  horrible  state.  I 
sent  a  lot  of  antiseptic  dressings  up  to  the  mountains. 

We  were  now  on  the  giddy  brink  of  war.  King 
Nikola  notified  the  Powers  that  if  they  would  not 
undertake  to  keep  order  by  delimiting  his  frontier 
and  protecting  it  from  Turkish  violation,  he  must 
himself  take  the  necessary  steps.  Generals  Mitar 
Martinovitch,  Yanko  Vukotitch,  and  Blazho  Boshko- 
vitch  held  a  council  of  war.  The  Powers  did  nothing, 
except,  as  usual,  cackle  like  a  lot  of  hens. 

Seventeen  guns  went  to  the  Zeta.  "  Voila,"  said 
the  Turkish  Counsel,  an  Armenian,  "  the  Turks  have 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS   165 

now  their  last  chance,  li  this  new  ministry  fail, 
c'est  une  debacle,  une  debacle  complete  I  Pray  God 
that  my  poor  Armenia  may  not  fall  into  the  hands 
of  Russia  !" 

It  was  reported  that  Russia  was  doing  her  best  to 
restrain  Montenegro;  but  I  noted  at  the  time  in  my 
diary  at  Cettigne  on  August  15:  "If  Russia  really 
wants  peace,  why  are  so  many  Russian  officers  toddling 
about  here  ?  They  can't  all  pretend  they  have  come 
to  teach  in  the  cadet  school,  when  it  is  closed  for  the 
summer  holidays." 

On  Friday,  August  16,  the  Montenegrin  Govern- 
ment notified  the  Legations  that  Nizams  had  fallen 
upon  certain  Christian  villages,  that  ten  men  had  been 
killed  and  thirty  women  and  children  taken  prisoners, 
and  so  worded  the  communication  that  it  appeared 
that  Montenegrin  territory  had  been  violated. 

I  was  sure  the  affair  was  beyond  the  border.  So 
it  was ;  but  it  was  impossible  to  get  a  clear  tale  from 
the  Montenegrin  authorities.  Yanko  Vukotitch  went 
up  at  once  to  Andriyevitza  to  take  command,  and  a 
rumour  flashed  in  shortly  that  the  Montenegrins  had 
taken  Berani;  but  this  proved  untrue.  Refugees 
were  reported  to  be  swarming  in,  and  there  were 
many  wounded. 

On  the  19th  at  10  a.m.  Cettigne  held  a  public 
indignation  meeting  in  the  market-place,  the  first 
public  meeting  permitted  under  the  recently  granted 
Constitution.  The  speakers  called  on  the  crowd  to 
rescue  their  brother-Serbs  beyond  the  border,  and 
were  loudly  applauded.  It  was  intended  to  demon- 
strate before  the  Palace  and  the  Legations,  but  the 
police  barred  the  way  and  the  meeting  dispersed. 


166        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

I  started  for  the  seat  of  war  next  morning  early, 
arriving  at  Podgoritza  by  eleven.  Here  I  liad  to 
search  for  a  carriage  which  would  drive  me  to  Andri- 
yevitza;  and,  when  found,  the  man  refused,  owing 
to  the  extreme  heat,  to  start  before  5  p.m.  During 
the  delay  Podgoritza  begged  me  not  to  go.  "  The 
guns  are  all  placed,"  they  said.  "  The  Balkan  Powers 
are  all  now  agreed.  Come  and  see  the  guns  early 
to-morrow.  The  first  shot  will  be  fired  within  twenty- 
four  hours."  I  cast  doubt,  and  was  told  that  "  men 
were  going  to  cut  grass  in  a  certain  spot,  and  if,  as 
was  hoped,  they  were  fired  on,  the  artillery  would 
retort  at  once." 

I  reflected  that  this  would  be  the  third  time  "  the 
grass  trick  "  was  played,  and  that  it  was  not  good 
enough,  so  clung  to  my  first  plan,  and  started  at 
5.30  p.m.  on  the  long  drive — a  soothing,  magical 
drive.  We  seemed  to  leave  heat,  hate,  and  squalid 
politics  all  behind  us  as  the  carriage  zigzagged  on 
and  on  up  the  mountain-road,  whose  edge  dropped 
sheer  into  bottomless  gloom,  while  the  peaks  towered 
above,  majestic  in  the  soft  green  light  of  a  big  half- 
moon. 

At  3  a.m.  we  halted  at  a  han  and  drowsed  till  7  a.m., 
and  arrived  finally,  with  weary  horses,  at  Andriyevitza 
at  7.30  p.m.,  two  days  and  one  night  after  leaving 
Cettigne. 

Andriyevitza  was  in  sore  plight.  Montenegro  had 
made  another  attempt  to  bring  things  to  a  climax, 
and  this  time  the  Turks  had  outwitted  her  and  taken 
terrible  vengeance.  Nearly  all  the  Serb  villages  near 
the  border  had  been  burnt.  They  all  formed  part 
of  the  Vassoievitch  tribe,  which  had  been  divided  by 


THE  GATHERING  OE  THE  WAK-CLOUDS   167 

the  Berlin  blunder;  everyone,  therefore,  in  Andri- 
yevitza  had  relatives  among  the  victims.  In  the 
schoolhouse  were  some  fifty  wounded,  including  several 
women  and  two  mutilated  children.  Refugees  were 
coming  in  daily.     The  situation  was  most  painful. 

So  closely  were  the  Montenegrin  and  Turkish  halves 
of  the  tribe  intertwined  that  the  Mayor  of  Andriye- 
vitza  had  been  member  for  Berani  in  the  first  Turkish 
Parliament  under  the  Constitution,  but  had  retired, 
as  it  was  a  farce,  and  the  despotism  of  the  ''  Union 
and  Progress  "  was  intolerable. 

Briefly,  the  IToung  Turks  had,  in  this  Serb  district, 
tried  forcible  Ottomanization.  The  school  was  closed, 
the  priest  flogged  and  imprisoned  in  a  filthy  latrine. 
Under  the  Constitution,  however,  the  district,  as  it 
had  a  Christian  majority,  had  the  right  to  a  Christian 
Kaimmakam.  Ilia  Popovitch,  a  native  Serb,  was 
appointed.  Poor  Ilia !  He  was  an  honest  and 
honourable  man,  but  he  and  his  young  French  wife 
undertook  an  impossible  task — to  create  "  un  petit  etat 
modele  "  of  his  district,  according  to  the  spirit  of  the 
Constitution.  As  his  unfortunate  widow  told  me,  he 
was  opposed  both  by  the  Moslem  Albanians  of  the 
district  and  the  Serbs  themselves — the  former  because 
they  dreaded  measures  that  would  allow  of  the 
development  and  expansion  of  the  Serb  element,  the 
Serbs  because  they  were  opposed  to  any  measures 
which  wuuld  help  to  make  peace  and  strengthen 
Turkey. 

A  further  difliculty  was  that  the  commandant  of 
the  frontier  garrison  would  not  act  together  with  a 
Christian  civilian,  and  opposed  him  violently  on  all 
points.     The  Turk  looked  on  Ilia  as  a  pro-Serb,  the 


168        THE  STRUGGLE  FOE  SCUTARI 

Serbs  considered  him  as  a  traitor  who  sided  with  the 
Young  Turks.  He  it  was  who  sent  the  telegram 
stating  that  the  Turks  had  fired  the  first  shot  at 
Mojkovach,  and  by  virtue  of  his  office  he  formed 
one  of  the  Commission  appointed  to  inquire  into 
the  affair. 

Exactly  what  happened  will  never  be  known. 
From  the  frontier  poor  Ilia  sent  a  hasty  note  to  his 
wife,  telling  her  to  go  to  Paris  at  once,  and  he  would 
join  her.  She,  with  her  infant  daughter  and  a  young 
Serb  lady  (her  friend),  alarmed,  left  Berani  secretly, 
and  fled  to  the  frontier  mountains.  Only  just  in 
time.  That  very  night,  the  night  of  August  14-15, 
Turkish  troops  and  Moslem  Albanians,  led  by  a 
Turkish  officer,  fell  upon  the  village  of  Lower  Urz- 
hanitza,  massacred  sixteen  persons  in  their  beds,  cut 
off  and  carried  away  three  heads,  and  took  thirty-one 
vv^omen  and  children  prisoners.  These  persons  were 
all  members  of  the  Tchoukitch  family,  which,  it  would 
appear,  were  suspected  by  the  Turks  of  being  con- 
cerned in  a  revolutionary  plot.  So  they  undoubtedly 
were,  but  the  savagery  of  the  Turkish  attack  was  un- 
pardonable. The  Montenegrin  troops,  which,  as  in 
the  Mojkovach  affair,  were  ready,  at  once  rushed  to 
the  aid  of  their  cousins  across  the  border,  burnt  all 
the  Turkish  frontier  blockhouses  in  the  neighbour- 
hood, crossed  the  frontier  with  their  guns,  and  the 
insurgent  natives  and  the  troops  together  would  have 
taken  Berani  had  not  the  Powers  at  Cettigne  ordered 
the  cessation  of  hostilities. 

Andriyevitza,  when  I  arrived,  was  furious  at  the 
recall  of  the  troops.  Seventeen  Serb  villages  had 
been  burnt  or  partially  burnt  and  plundered;    the 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS    169 

number  of  dead  was  not  yet  known.  I  went  to  in- 
ve.stigate  the  truth,  and  crossed  the  frontier  with  one 
of  the  surviving  Tchoukitches — a  schoolmaster  from 
Podgoritza.  The  Montenegrins  had  a  large  camp  on 
a  hill  on  the  very  frontier,  and  two  big  guns  pointing 
at  Berani.  We  passed  the  burnt  Turkish  block- 
houses, and  crawled  round  under  cover  of  the  hills 
to  avoid  the  Turkish  guns,  which  might  open  fire. 
From  these  blockhouses  the  frontier  guard  had  been 
for  the  past  three  years  in  the  habit  of  firing  at  the 
Montenegrin  houses  across  the  border,  and  as  these 
were  of  wood,  and  not  more  than  1,000  metres  away, 


^"^ieq^ 


MONTEKEOBIN  WOODEN  HOUSES. 


the  bullets  ripped  right  through  them.  The  priest  of 
Budimlje  (one  of  the  burnt  villages),  a  wild  figure  in 
native  di'ess,  with  long  black  elf-locks  streaming  from 
head  and  beard,  climbed  up  to  us  and  narrated  recent 
events. 

I  passed  on  through  Urzhanitza,  saw  the  black  heap 
of  ashes,  all  that  was  left  of  the  house  where  Suro 
Tchoukitch  was  beheaded.  Hard  by,  at  a  cottage- 
door,  sat  his  weeping  daughter.  So  on,  through 
misery  and  terrified  people,  who  begged  that  Europe 
should  be  told  of  their  plight,  and  thanked  me  for 
risking  my  life  to  visit  them.  Wretched  pawns  in 
the  game  of  politics,  they  were  primarily  the  victims 


170      THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

of  the  Berlin  Treaty,  which  "  had  not  considered  the 
ethnographical  question,"  and  secondly  of  Monte- 
negro's schemes  for  aggrandizement.  No  lot  can  be 
more  miserable  than  that  of  the  luckless  human  beings 
who  are  used  as  live  bait  by  ambitious  rulers. 

Tchoukitch  piloted  me  safely  right  up  to  the  in- 
surgents' camp  in  an  old  cemetery,  the  thick  stone 
wall  of  which  gave  cover  from  whence  we  could  see 
the  Turkish  camp  beyond.  The  leaders,  one  of  whom 
was  said  to  be  brother  to  the  Servian  Consul  at 
Saloniki,  were  desperately  resolved  to  fight  till  their 
district  was  free.  They  were  savage  with  Monte- 
negro for  withdrawing  the  guns  and  troops,  and,  as 
they  said,  ''  betraying  us." 

The  feeling  in  the  whole  district,  including  Andriye- 
vitza,  was  apparently  pro- Serb  rather  than  pro- 
Montenegrin.  Andriyevitza  had  never  forgiven  King 
Nikola  for  condemning  to  death  as  rebels  three  of  its 
goodliest  sons  but  a  short  while  ago. 

Of  Isa  Boletin,  the  Albanian  leader,  both  the  in- 
surgents and  Tchoukitch  were  full  of  praise.  Wherever 
he  ruled,  no  Serbs  were  molested,  but  were  treated 
with  great  justice.  He  had  even  supplied  Serb  in- 
surgents with  arms. 

Firing  was  expected  to  begin  as  usual  in  the  even- 
ing, and  the  insurgents  would  not,  therefore,  permit 
me  to  go  farther.  As  it  was,  I  did  not  reach  Andriye- 
vitza till  9.30  p.m.,  tired  out. 

Next  day  came  news  that  Djavid  Pasha  had 
arrived  with  four  battalions  at  Berani.  All  Andriye- 
vitza was  aghast.  Berani  could  have  easily  been 
taken  last  week,  they  said;  now  it  was  too  late.  All 
the  insurgents  would  be  massacred,  and  Montenegro 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS   171 

might  not  go  to  their  help.  General  Yanko  Vukotitch 
came  to  me  much  harrowed.  He  "  wished  to  com- 
municate with  Djavid,  but  was  afraid  of  treachery. 
H  only  a  stranger  could  be  found  to  act  as  inter- 
mediary !  .  .  .  Would  I,  perhaps  ?  .  .  .  With  a 
white  flag  the  risk  would  not  be  great.  ...  Of 
course,  the  Turks  fired  on  it  sometimes  .  .  .  but 
when  they  saw  it  was  a  woman  ..." 

I  was  amazed.  How  often  did  fat  Yanko  mean  to 
fall  into  holes,  and  then  expect  a  foreign  female  to 
pull  him  out  ?  But  I  expressed  myself  as  willing  to 
take  aU  risks.  Yanko  said  he  would  let  me  know 
to-morrow.  His  officers  very  properly  objected  to 
the  scheme,  but  as  none  of  them  dared  ride  to  Berani, 
they  met  Djavid's  envoys  at  ''  the  frontier  of  the 
insurgents,"  who  held  half  the  valley. 

Djavid  demanded  immediate  peace  and  the  sur- 
render of  arms.  The  insurgents  refused.  All  An- 
driyevitza  sympathized.  The  number  of  wounded 
brought  in  was  now  sixty-eight,  among  whom  were 
the  two  mutilated  children,  who,  fortunately  for 
themselves,  died.  Very  great  anxiety  was  felt  for 
the  thirty-one  women  and  children  prisoners  at  Berani. 

A  furious  meeting  demanded  war.  Jovan  Pla- 
menatz,  the  Minister  of  the  Interior,  arrived  in  all 
his  best  clothes,  and  proclaimed  peace  in  King 
Nikola's  name. 

One  of  the  insurgent  leaders,  Avro  Tsemovich,  sent 
a  letter  to  Djavid,  which  he  signed  with  the  names  of 
the  other  leaders,  accepting  peace.  This  caused  great 
anger.  Andriyevitza  cursed,  but  submitted.  Tse- 
movich, a  big  animal  with  bloodshot  eyes,  came  to 
me,  breathing  rakia  and  a-stuttcr  with  drink,  explaiu- 


172        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

ing  away  his  conduct  incoherently;  and  the  picture 
that  remains  of  him  in  my  mind  is  such  that  I  can 
credit  all  the  subsequent  charges  against  him. 

I  communicated  the  details  about  the  imprisoned 
women  and  children  to  Cettigne,  and  through  the 
influence  of  the  British  Government  their  release  was 
obtained. 

Meanwhile  the  unfortunate  wife  of  Ilia  Popovitch 
(the  Kaimmakam)  was  waiting,  sick  with  anxiety,  for 
news  of  her  husband.  It  came.  He  had  been  hacked 
to  pieces  before  the  Konak  at  Sjenitza,  his  eyes 
torn  out,  and  his  fragments  left  unburied  three  days 
for  the  dogs  to  gnaw.  The  Turkish  officials,  so  said 
eyewitnesses,  looked  out  of  the  window  and  offered 
no  help.  How  poor  Ilia  came  to  Sjenitza,  a  purely 
Slav  district  not  far  from  the  Servian  frontier,  no  one 
will  ever  know.  Nor  has  it  ever  been  proved  who 
planned  his  death.  Andriyevitza  declared  that  the 
frontier  Izbashi,  Muhedin  Bey,  did  so,  to  avenge  the 
fact  that  Ilia  had  declared  the  Turks  guilty  of  firing 
the  first  shots  at  Mojkovach.  But  later  some  Alban- 
ians, who  had  been  at  Berani  with  the  Turkish 
army,  declared  that  it  was  the  work  of  the  Serbs,  who 
wished  to  get  rid  of  a  man  who  was  working  to  keep 
the  peace  and  thereby  block  Servia's  plans  for  ex- 
pansion.    We  shall  never  know. 

I  never  felt  more  sorry  for  a  stranger  than  for  his 
unhappy  widow,  a  Frenchwoman,  left  penniless  in  a 
wild  land  with  one  little  child  and  another  about  to  be 
born.  It  is  such  as  these  who  really  pay  in  the  great 
game  of  international  politics. 

None  of  us  dared  tell  her  the  hideous  news,  and  she 
left  for  Cettigne. 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS    173 

Peace  was  patched  up  for  the  moment.  But 
sniping  was  constantly  reported  from  the  borders. 
Only  prompt  rectification  of  the  frontier  could  make 
peace  lasting.  So  long  a  list  of  victims  was  given 
me  that  I  decided  to  go  at  once  and  see  for  myself. 

A  frontier  Captain  was  going  to  Polimia.  I  took 
the  opportunity  and  started  in  a  hurry  on  a  wooden 
pack-saddle.  We  arrived  in  pitch  darkness  at  the 
telegraph-station,  which  was  also  an  inn  and  a 
military  outpost,  only  to  learn  that  a  man  had  that 
day  died,  shot  from  across  the  border.  A  lot  of 
angry  men  told  of  men,  women,  and  cattle  killed  and 
wounded  in  the  past  four  years.  I  passed  a  wTetched 
night  crowded  in  one  stuffy  room  with  the  tele- 
graphists and  the  frontier  guard.  And  while  washing 
at  the  stream  in  the  dawn  of  next  day  heard  the  sharp 
tack-tack  of  the  Turkish  Mausers  from  a  kula  at  the 
end  of  the  valley.  The  surroundings  were  most 
extraordinary.  No  less  than  five  kulas  looked  down 
on  us,  nearly  all  within  range  of  the  Polimia  people, 
who  were  helpless  as  rats  in  a  pit. 

Twenty  houses  had  been  deserted  as  uninhabitable. 
From  many  others  folk  only  dared  come  forth  at  night. 

I  climbed  with  the  Captain  and  some  soldiers  up  the 
mountain  Dzamiya,  where  stood  the  Montenegrin 
frontier  kula,  a  very  stiff  ascent,  and  thence  saw  the 
frontier,  complicated  beyond  belief,  coiling  in  and 
out,  one  valley  Montenegrin,  one  Turkish — tongues 
of  land  so  narrow  that  a  rifle  bullet  could  carry  right 
across  and  kill  on  the  way.  The  Veliki  Valley  alone 
had  seven  kulas  round  it.  We  crouched  behind  a 
stone  rampart,  as  the  next  kula  was  firing  at  intervals. 

A  military  wire  brought  word  that  the  Captain  was 


174        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

to  return  at  once  to  Andriyevitza.  Up  leapt  the 
Montenegrins  and  rushed  straight  down  the  mountain- 
side. It  was  all  I  could  do  to  follow.  Then  came 
a  ride  in  the  dark  as  fast  as  possible,  on  the  wooden 
pack-saddle,  and  I  arrived  dead-beat  and  shaken  to 
pieces. 

Yanko  and  Plamenatz  had  both  left. 

I  had  given  both  maize  and  money  to  as  many  of  the 
refugees  as  I  could.  It  was  growing  very  cold.  I  had 
come  only  with  a  pair  of  saddle-bags,  and  had  no 
warm  clothing,  so  decided  to  return  to  Cettigne,  but 
the  frontier  Commandant,  Major  Veshovitch,  opposed 
this. 

"  Wait,"  he  said,  "  something  will  happen." 

I  whiled  away  the  time  by  writing  an  article  which 
would  be  in  time  for  the  October  reviews,  in  which  I 
detailed  the  state  of  affairs.  "  If  the  Balkan  people," 
I  wrote,  "  are  left  to  fight  it  out  between  themselves 
and  the  Turk,  there  can  be  little  doubt  of  the  issue. 
Together  the  Greeks  and  the  Balkan  people  can  put 
something  like  600,000  men  in  the  field,  all  well 
armed,  and  mostly  first-class  fighting  stuff.  The 
Christian  subjects  of  the  Turk  would  all  aid  the  in- 
vading armies.  .  .  .  The  Turk  was  a  great  soldier,  but 
he  is  now  so  decayed  that  he  is  forced  to  send  his 
officers  abroad  to  learn  the  arts  of  war.  Nor  can  he 
now  make  his  own  weapons;  he  has  to  borrow  the 
money  with  which  he  buys  them,"  and  so  forth. 
And  I  ended  with  the  warning  paragraph:  "  Not  even 
the  Great  Powers  can  now  arrest  the  course  of  nature 
— things  can  no  longer  remain  in  statu  quo.  It  re- 
mains only  to  decide  whether  it  shall  end  in  a  blood- 
bath.    The  curtain  is  rising  on  the  last  act." 


THE  GATHEPvTXG  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS    175 

To  my  great  disappointment  this  article  which  I 
had  intended  to  herald,  and  foretell  the  results  of,  the 
war,  was  never  published.  The  editors  were  so  ill- 
informed  that  they  did  not  believe  in  it. 

Still  nothing  ha])pened.  T  grew  tired  of  waiting. 
Then  the  Commandant  told  me  that  as  Turkey  could 
not  be  made  to  declare  war,  Montenegro  would.  He 
had  sent  a  whole  battalion  to  Dzamiya  and  finished 
an  artillery  track  to  the  summit,  was  at  work  on 
others  to  neighbouring  heights,  had  commandeered 
GOO  horses  to  fetch  up  small  ammunition,  and  the 
bomb  was  made  which  was  to  blow  up  a  Turkish  kula 
on  the  Gusinje  border.  This  would  be  the  signal  for 
a  general  rising  of  the  Serbs  across  the  border. 

These  came  every  night  in  batches  of  100  to  150  at 
a  time.  Some  were  extraordinarily  wild  types,  lean, 
dark-eyed,  and  shaven-headed,  who  squatted  on  the 
ground  and  howled  weird  songs  at  night.  So  much 
from  "  the  back  of  beyond  "  were  many  that  they 
brought  with  them  as  money,  coins  of  Maria  Teresa, 
and  suchlike,  and  were  dismayed  to  find  they  would 
not  buy  bread. 

Each  man  received  a  repeating-rifle  of  an  old  pat- 
tern, and  a  belt  of  cartridges.  The  Turkish  military 
attache  arrived  one  day  on  his  way  to  Berani,  and  a 
whole  gang  of  men  from  Ipek  nahia  had  to  be  hastily 
hidden  in  the  school. 

Arming  went  on  thus  nearly  every  night.  And 
spies  brought  word  that  Servia  was  mobilizing  as  fast 
as  possible,  quietly,  and  that  Servian  Komitadjis 
were  already  out. 

The  Montenegrin  schoolmaster  from  Plava  came 
down    for    orders.     He    was    one    of    the    insurgent 


176        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

leaders  of  that  district,  and,  in  the  crowded  guest- 
room at  the  baker's,  yelled  the  most  blood-curdling 
discourse  I  have  ever  heard.  It  was  to  be  war;  the 
Christians  this  time  had  sworn  to  pay  back  to  the 
Turks  all  they  had  done  to  them  through  all  the  cen- 
turies— outrage  for  outrage,  mutilation  for  mutilation. 
"  Last  year  the  Maltsors  behaved  with  the  utmost 
moderation.  They  spared  the  mosques,  released  all 
prisoners  unscathed,  assaulted  no  women,  behaved 
well  in  all  respects,  and  hoped  that  the  Powers  would 
mark  it  to  their  credit  and  recognize  they  were  fight- 
ing for  freedom.  But  the  Powers  cast  them  back  to 
the  Turks  with  no  guarantee  of  decent  treatment ;  to 
the  Turks,  who  had  burnt  and  defiled  their  churches, 
violated  their  women,  and  burnt  wounded  alive  in  the 
houses.  This  showed  that  the  Powers  like  atrocities — 
they  encourage  barbarism,  and,  by  God  !  they  shall 
have  it."  The  audience  roared  applause.  I,  horrified, 
said  they  would  lose  all  outside  sympathy  if  they 
showed  themselves  as  bad  as  the  Turks,  and  they 
shouted  me  down.  It  was  a  most  remarkable 
speech,  for  it  stated  truly  that  the  Maltsors  had  fought 
honestly  the  year  before,  and  expressed  the  intention 
most  emphatically  on  the  part  of  the  Montenegrins 
to  commit  atrocities.  But  in  a  very  few  months 
Montenegro  denied  to  Europe  that  they  had  done  so, 
and  attempted  to  put  all  the  guilt  upon  the  Maltsors. 
News  came  from  Podgoritza  that  the  Maltsors  had 
again  risen  and  were  trying  hard  to  take  Dechich.  I 
decided  not  to  wait  for  the  Commandant's  bomb,  but 
to  go  to  the  help  of  the  Maltsors,  about  whose  fate  I 
was  extremely  anxious.  War  was  certain,  and  what 
would  happen  to  them  ? 


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  WAR-CLOUDS    177 

Two  days  were  lost  tinding  a  conveyance.  I 
started  in  torrents  of  rain,  plodded  through  deep  mud, 
and  arrived  at  Podgoritza  to  find  that,  though  there 
was  temporary  quiet,  the  Maltsors  had  made  a 
desperate  struggle  for  ten  days  to  capture  Dechich ; 
had  captured  Planinitza  and  all  its  arms,  but  been 
again  dislodged,  by  artillery  from  the  summit.  With- 
out artillery  Dechich  could  not  be  stormed.  But 
they  had  destroyed  nearly  a  whole  Turkish  Battalion 
near  Nenhelm,  had  cut  the  route  and  the  water  canal, 
and  hoped  to  starve  Dechich  out.  Ded  Soko  of 
Klimenti  was  out  with  his  men  at  Breg  Mati  w4th  the 
object  of  blocking  the  route  of  any  Turkish  reinforce- 
ments from  Tirana. 

The  Gruda  and  Shala  tribes  had  never  accepted  the 
peace  made  by  the  Archbishop  at  Bukovitza,  and  all 
the  tribes  regretted  they  had  allowed  the  Turks  to 
pass  out  with  their  artillery.  Gruda  was  especially 
angry  that  Turldsh  troops  had  not  been  withdrawn 
from  her  territory,  as  they  had  been  from  the  other 
tribe  lands. 

The  peace  at  Bukovitza  had,  indeed,  been  made  by 
the  advice  of  the  Austrian  Consul-General,  Zambaur, 
who  told  the  Maltsors  to  be  patient. 

But  what  they  wanted  was  not  foreign  rule,  but 
freedom;  so,  at  the  time  of  the  Eucharistic  congress 
(September  10)  at  Vienna,  they  gave  Austria  an  ulti- 
matum. "  The  situation  is  quite  intolerable.  Do 
you  mean  to  help  us  ?  Yes  or  No."  "  No  "  was  the 
reply.  And  they  retorted:  "  Very  well,  then,  we  will 
call  for  help  to  Montenegro." 

Certain  of  their  Austrian  advisers  believed  that  it 
waui  now  highly  desirable  that  the  atatiui  qiio  should 

12 


178        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

be  overthrown,  and  that  to  allow  Montenegro  to  do  so 
would  be  the  best  policy.  The  mistake  which  Austria 
made  throughout  was  in  under-rating  the  Serb  army. 
Various  headmen  of  the  Maltsors  accordingly  went 
to  Cettigne.  The  agreement  they  declared  them- 
selves to  have  made  was  that  they  would  fight  to- 
gether with  Montenegro  and  drive  out  all  Turks  from 
the  borders.  King  Nikola  would  not  take  any  of  their 
territory.  All  he  wished  was  to  free  his  frontiers 
from  Turks. 


PART    III 
WAR 

'  And  to  make  the  cause  of  Religion  to  descend  to  the  cruell 
and  execrable  Actions,  of  Murthering  Princes,  and  Butchery  of 
People  .  .  .  surely  this  is  to  bring  Downe  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  stead 
of  the  Likene^se  of  a  Dove,  in  the  Shape  of  a  Vulture  or  a  Raven: 
And  to  set,  out  of  the  Barke  of  a  Christian  Church,  a  Flagge  of 
Piratfi  and  Assassins." 


'^^    '^     /f  >) 


CB0S3  AGAINST  CRESCENT. 


CHAPTER  XI 

"  Onward,  Christian  soldiers, 
Marching  on  through  war. 
With  the  Cross  of  Jesus, 
Red  with  Moslem  gore." 

HvMN  OF  King  Ferdinand. 

At  Cettigne  there  wa.s  no  question  of  patching 
frontiers.  Students  sang  "  Onamo,  onamo  !*'  (On- 
ward, onward,  let  me  see  Prizren  !),  the  King's  battle 
hymn,  in  the  streets.  It  should  be  noted  that,  in  the 
early  days  of  the  war,  Prizren  was  the  popular  objec- 
tive, and  that  the  King  undoubtedly  aspired  to  make 
it  his  capital  as  King  of  Great  Servia. 

On  declaring  war,  he  issued  a  proclamation  in 
which  he  "  called  upon  the  Montenegrins  to  help  their 
brethren  in  Old  Servia,  where  Serb  men,  women,  and 
children  were  being  massacred.  However  adverse  His 
Majesty    might    be    from    disturbing    the    peace    of 

Europe,  there  was  nothing  left  for  him  but  to  take 

181 


182        THE  STEUGGLE  FOE  SCUTAEI 

up  the  sword,  for  his  hopes  of  liberating  the  Serbs  of 
Turkey  without  bloodshed  had  been  vain.  Monte- 
negro, therefore,  declared  a  Holy  War,  inspired  by  the 
noblest  intentions  of  preventing  the  final  extermina- 
tion of  its  brethren." 

I  saw  Yanko.  He  was  starting  at  once  for  Andri- 
yevitza,  to  take  command,  and  had  with  him  a  young 
friend  as  secretary,  of  whom  we  shall  hear  more 
later. 

All  horses  and  vehicles  were  already  commandeered 
for  the  army.  Yanko  told  me  I  must  start  soon  if  I 
wished  to  see  the  first  shot  fired. 

I  saw  Mitar  Martinovitch  bubbling  with  enthu- 
siasm. "  We  have  all  the  Maltsors  with  us  !"  he  cried. 
I  said:  "  No,  Excellency,  you  have  not."  To  which 
he  replied:  "  Mademoiselle,  I  am  very  well  informed." 
And  I:  *'  So  am  I,  Excellency." 

Cettigne  was  dead-calm.  Nearly  everyone  had 
gone  down  to  the  front.  I  went  to  the  hospital 
to  see  if  things  were  ready  there  and  to  offer  help 
if  necessary. 

Dr.  Matanovitch  assured  me  that  all  was  ready.  He 
and  the  Eussian  Sister  opened  a  small  cupboard,  and 
showed  me  it  was  full  of  shirts  and  bandages.  And 
as  he  had  very  little  trained  help,  and  as  this  was  the 
only  hospital,  he  said  he  would  be  glad  if  I  would  go 
as  near  the  front  as  possible,  and  gave  me  some  "  first- 
aid  "  dressings.  If  I  were  overtired  and  knocked  up, 
he  added,  he  could  give  me  a  private  room  in  the 
hospital. 

I  was  struck  dumb  with  amazement.  He,  and 
apparently  the  authorities,  believed  that  this  small 
hospital  of  some  150  beds  would  suffice  for  the  whole 


WAR  183 

campaign.  Nothing  else  had  been  prepared;  no 
other  hospital  existed. 

The  Montenegrins,  then,  really  expected  the  war 
to  be  over  in  from  four  to  six  weeks.  They  began 
purposely  before  their  allies,  and,  I  believe,  without 
informing  them ;  for  they  believed  themselves  in- 
vincible, and  meant  to  sweep  up  all  Kosovo  vilayet 
before  the  Serbs  were  ready.  Of  the  Serbs  they  had 
no  opinion  at  all. 

When  I  asked,  "  What  is  the  Servian  army 
worth  ?"  "  They  are  a  lot  of  swineherds,"  was  the 
invariable  reply. 

The  plan  of  campaign,  as  expounded  to  me,  was 
that  the  army  should  be  divided  into  three  parts. 
One  under  Yanko  Vukotitch — the  Kolashin-Andri- 
yevitza  division — was  to  attack  Kosovo  vilayet;  the 
second,  under  Mitar  Martinovitch,  was  to  attack 
Scutari  from  the  Tarabosh  side ;  the  third,  under 
Blazho  Boshkovitch,  was  to  attack  it  from  the 
Podgoritza  side.  All  three  divisions  were  to  unite 
subsequently  at  Prizren,  which  was  spoken  of  as  the 
main  objective.     Yanko  himself  told  me  so. 

Together  with  every  friend  of  the  South  Slavs,  I 
was  anxious  that  the  almost  wholly  Slav  districts  of 
the  Sanjak,  of  Berani,  and  the  frontier  should  be 
freed.  But  Prizren,  I  regarded  (and  regard)  as  an 
Albanian  town  and  district,  and  hoped  it  would  so 
remain. 

On  Sunday,  October  0,  with  an  odd  feeling  that  I 
was  shortlv  about  to  undergo  an  operation,  I  left 

Cettigne  with  D ,  the  newly  appointed  (rovemor 

of  Podgoritza,  and  throe  of  his  assistants;  for  the 
reign  of  Stauko  Markovitch  was  over.     The  martyr- 


184        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

dom  of  the  horses  had  begun;  the  wretched  brutes 
had  made  the  long  journey  backwards  and  forwards 
contmuously  for  two  days  and  nights,  and  could 
scarcely  crawl.  We  walked  on  foot  much  of  the  way, 
and  arrived  very  late. 

On  Monday,  October  7,  Prince  Danilo  arrived  and 
inspected  the  troops.  A  surprisingly  large  propor- 
tion were  old  men.  They  marched  past  in  irregular 
herds,  singing  war-songs.  Before  the  Voyni  Stan, 
on  the  historic  ground  where  little  over  a  year  before 
we  had  persuaded  the  Maltsors  to  make  peace, 
numbers  of  men  squatted  about  awaiting  uniforms 
and  orders.  One  old  man,  finishing  his  lunch,  held 
the  carefully  picked  sheep's  blade-bone  against  the 
sun. 

My  theory  about  bone-reading  has  always  been 
that  the  seers  see  that  which  they  expect.  "  What 
does  the  bone  say  V  1  asked.  He  stared  long  and 
anxiously,  and  shook  his  head.  "  Blood.  And  more 
blood.  Nothing  but  blood."  I  had  expected  him  to 
see  at  least  the  taking  of  Prizren,  and  was  interested. 
He  threw  it  down  with  a  sigh. 

News  came  that  Essad  Pasha  had  ordered  the 
Maltsors  to  accept  the  terms  arranged  by  the  Kosovo 
vilayet  insurgents,  but  that  they  had  replied  they 
were  sick  of  Turkish  promises.  Ded  Soko  and  his 
men  offered  resistance  at  Breg  Mati ;  but  Essad,  who 
had  realized  that  he  must  play  Turkish  to  save 
Scutari,  fought  his  way  through,  and  arrived  at 
Scutari  with  large  reinforcements.  Djavid  Pasha 
and  his  army  had  evacuated  Berani. 

On  the  8th  martial  law  was  proclaimed,  but  no  one 
took  any  notice  of  it.     Orders  were  given  out  that 


WAE  185 

correspondents  were  to  send  only  the  official  news 
given  out  at  Cettigne. 

Professor  Kovachevitch,  teacher  of  French  and 
German  at  the  Gymnasium  at  Podgoritza,  was 
anxious  that  I  should  employ  him  as  assistant  in  any 
corresponding  work  I  might  do.  Being  lame,  he  was 
not  liable  for  active  service. 

"  Soon/'  said  he,  "  you  will  see  the  noses  come  in. 
We  shall  not  leave  many  a  Turk  with  a  nose." 

"  If  you  do  any  such  swinery,"  said  I,  "  you  will 
rightly  lose  all  European  sympathy." 

He  was  very  angry.  "It  is  our  old  national 
custom,"  he  declared;  *'  how  can  a  soldier  prove  his 
heroism  to  his  commander  if  he  does  not  brine  in 
noses?  Of  course  we  shall  cut  noses;  we  always 
have." 

He  had  travelled  considerably,  and  been  in  English 
employ  in  Egypt;  but  the  blood  of  the  primitive 
savage  flowed  in  hun,  and  he,  the  trainer  of 
youth,  gloated  and  boasted  over  the  idea  of  severed 
lips,  ears,  and  noses,  and  confirmed  the  report 
that  all  Turkish  coi-pses  at  Moykovach  had  been 
mutilated. 

I  expressed  strong  disgust,  and  hoped  that  the 
presence  of  foreign  military  attaches,  doctors,  and 
correspondents  would  prevent  the  possibility  of  the 
hideous  atrocities  which  occurred  always  in  local 
risings  and  fights,  far  from  foreign  eyes. 

All  the  royal  Voyvodas — Bozho,  Marko,  Gjuro, 
Sharko — arrived,  and  it  was  given  out  that  King 
Nikola,  who  till  recently  could  "  bear,  like  the  Turk, 
no  brother  near  the  throne,"  had  made  up  liis  family 
quarrels. 


186         THE  STEUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

At  night  there  was  great  singing  of  "Let  me  see 
Prizren."  The  Zetski  and  Piperski  battalions  went 
up  Fundina  way.  The  Nikshitchski  and  Vuchidolski, 
to  the  Zeta  plains.  I  went  up  to  bed  early,  to  be 
ready  for  emergencies,  and  on  the  stairs  met  old 
Voy\^oda  Gjuro,  who  said:  "  It  will  be  to-morrow — 
and  then  as  God  wills." 

Next  day,  the  9th,  I  rose  at  five,  before  the  dawn. 
The  Voyvodas  were  leaving  in  carriages.  It  was 
dark,  and  a  fine  drizzle  was  falling.  A  long  line  of 
pack-horses  waited  dismally  under  the '  trees.  Only 
those  whose  owners  were  present  got  a  feed. 

The  Bishop  of  Ostrog  appeared,  having  just  blessed 
the  Alaj-bariak  (military  standard)  in  the  church  at 
a  private  service  before  the  Royal  Family. 

I  asked  for  Blazho  Boshkovitch,  hoping  he  would 
tell  me  where  to  go,  and  was  told  (1)  that  he  was  at 
Fundina;  (2)  that  he  was  not  yet  up  !  A  perianik 
(one  of  the  King's  bodyguard)  shouted  to  Kovache- 
vitch,  who  was  also  waiting:  "  The  King  has  gone  up 
to  the  top  of  Goritza  \" 

We  started  for  the  little  hill  from  which  Podgoritza 
takes  its  name.  The  rain  ceased;  the  sun  came  out 
and  sparkled  on  the  coarse  drenched  grass.  About 
thi'ee-quarters  of  the  way  up  we  were  halted  by  the 
perianiks,  and  saw  the  King,  in  full  Montenegrin 
costume,  standing  brilliantly  white  against  the  sky, 
on  the  summit,  with  Prince  Mirko  and  a  small 
suite. 

The  clouds  lifted  from  the  mountains  with  a  won- 
derful play  of  light  and  shade.  Not  a  sound  was 
heard  but  the  tinkle  of  sheepbells  from  the  wide  plain 
below,  across  which  ran  the  frontier-line.     Beyond  it 


WAR  187 

towered  Dechich,  with  its  roughly  fortified  Turkish 
outposts.  The  aii'  was  crystal  clear.  An  endless 
quarter  of  an  hour  dragged  by.  So  peaceful  was  the 
scene  it  was  hard  to  realize  that  the  long-talked-of 
status  quo  was  about  to  be  shattered  and  the  map  of 
Europe  changed.  In  the  strain  of  excitement  all 
possible  and  impossible  results  of  the  approaching 
fall  of  the  Turk  whirled  through  my  mind.  Boom  ! 
The  big  gun  roared  from  Gradina,  on  the  height  to 
our  left,  fired  by  Prince  Petar.  A  great  white  fuff 
of  smoke  showed  where  it  struck  Planinitza,  the  camp 
on  the  flank  of  Dechich.  I  had  no  field-glasses,  but, 
so  clear  was  the  air,  I  could  see  the  walled  camp  with 
the  naked  eye. 

The  bells  rang  out  from  the  church  below  us;  the 
band,  which  was  with  the  King,  struck  up  the  national 
hymn.  The  few  spectators,  mostly  little  boys,  and 
the  perianiks  joined  in,  and  shouted  "  Zliivio  !" 

I  looked  at  my  watch;  it  was  8  a.m.  And  we  were 
at  war.  The  shots  followed  in  quick  succession. 
More  missed  than  hit.  We  watched,  with  all  our  eyes, 
for  two  hours,  which  passed  like  minutes.  Suddenly 
a  great  column  of  flame  and  smoke  leapt  up  from 
Planinitza.  Some  ammunition  must  have  been  ex- 
ploded by  a  shell.  Another  followed.  Soon  I  could 
see  the  Nizams,  tiny  khaki  dots,  in  full  retreat.  The 
first  victory  had  been  scored. 

Already  the  Montenegrins  were  shelling  Rogom,  a 
camp  near  the  foot  of  Dechich,  and  the  summit  of 
Dechich  itself.  To  everyone's  suqirise,  the  Turks 
made  no  reply  save  two  shells,  which  foil  far  short. 
They  had,  in  fact,  no  long-range  guns.  A  rattle  of 
rifle-fire  told  that,  under  cover  of  the  artillery,  the 


188        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

Maltsors,  together  with  some  Montenegrins,  were 
attacking  at  close  quarters. 

When  Planinitza  fell,  the  King  and  suite  left 
Goritza.  I  hurried  after  and  obtained  permission 
from  the  Governor  to  telegraph  at  once  to  The  Times 
and  another  paper  that  war  was  declared,  and  handed 
in  the  messages  at  10.30,  believing  I  had  given  Europe 
the  first  news.  So  I  had;  but,  unfortunately,  one 
Zhivkovitch,  a  friend  of  the  King,  was  acting  both 
as  Renter  correspondent  and  Press  censor.  He 
changed  the  date  of  my  messages,  and  held  them  back 
nearly  twenty-four  hours;  and  so,  though  he  did  not 
send  his  own  till  late  in  the  evening,  his  was  the 
first  in. 

I  emphasize  this  fact  because  I  believe  all  corre- 
spondents suffered  from  it,  and  not  only  the  corre- 
spondents, but  the  public.  For  the  earliest  "  news  '' 
that  came  out  was  generally  a  version  concocted  in 
the  palace.  No  correspondent  should  be  allowed  to 
act  at  the  same  time  as  Press  censor. 

Returning  from  the  telegraph-office,  a  woman 
stopped  me  and  gasped:  "Don't  tell,  anyone  I  told 
you — Blazho  is  dead  \" 

"  What !"  I  cried;  "  Blazho  Boshkovitch  V 

"  Yes.  A  soldier  I  know  has  told  me;  it  is  a  secret. 
There  were  four  bullets  in  him.  They  say  he  shot 
himself.     In  God's  name,  do  not  tell  of  me  V 

I  asked  at  his  quarters,  "  Where  is  Blazho  V  and 
was  told,  "  At  Fundina."     So  he  was — but  dead. 

The  dull  "  boom  "  of  heavy  guns  went  on  all  the 
afternoon  from  Gradina  and  the  Zeta.  Roorom  and 
Vranje  and  Vladnje,  Turkish  border-posts,  were  under 
continuous  fire.    At  evening  it  was  made  public  that 


WAR  189 

Blazho  was  dead,  and  had  been  buried  hurriedly  and 
privately.  Suicide  was  the  official  report.  "  He  had 
gone  mad,  tried  to  attack  Dechich  at  night  with  only 
a  few  men,  and  had  shot  Imnself  in  despair."  But  it 
was  whispered  through  the  town  that  late  at  night  he 
had  been  heard  in  hot  dispute  with  one  of  the  Prmces, 
and  had  been  found  dead  some  tune  afterwards;  that 
no  man  could  fire  four  bullets  into  himself;  and  why 
was  no  public  inquiiy  made;  and  so  forth.  Murder 
was  the  verdict  of  his  friends  and  relations,  who 
firmly  denied  the  charge  of  insanity,  and  swore  they 
would  exhume  the  body  so  soon  as  war  was  over,  and 
prove  the  manner  of  death.  But  the  war  lasted  much 
longer  than  anyone  anticipated,  and  the  mystery  of 
Blazho's  death  will  never  be  explained.  Peace  be  to 
his  ashes  !     Prmce  Danilo  took  over  the  command. 

October  10. — The  dull  thud  of  big  guns  began  early. 
By  7  a.m.  I  was  far  out  on  the  plain,  lymg  flat,  so  as 
not  to  draw  fire,  and  listening  to  the  shells  that 
swished  across  well  ahead  of  me.  On  my  right  the 
Zeta  guns  were  playing  on  Vranje,  and  on  my  left  the 
Gradina  guns  were  fii'mg  on  Dechich.  Two  shells  in 
quick  succession  struck  the  summit,  which  was  pro- 
tected only  by  a  rough  stone  wall  run  up  since  Tour- 
goud  Pasha  occupied  the  height  last  year.  It  could 
not  by  any  possibility  hold  out  long,  and  made  no 
reply.  Vranje,  a  modern  fortress,  was  answermg 
strongly.  I  crawled  nearer,  and  saw  the  fire  from 
both  sides. 

At  7.45  a  terrible  continuous  rattle  of  rifle-fire 
began  on  the  slopes  off  Dechich  above  Miljesh.  I 
wondered  how  any  human  being  could  live  through 
such  a  fire.     But  it  seems  that  with  repeating-rifies 


190        THE  STEUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

the  men,  once  started,  keep  up  ceaseless  fire,  whether 
there  is  much  chance  of  killmg  or  not.  The  big  guns 
boomed  continuously.  The  slopes  of  Dechich  were 
a-smoke.  At  8.30  firing  slackened.  A  heavy  cloud 
settled  on  the  mountain-top,  and  a  sudden  silence.  A 
few  drops  of  rain  fell.  Dechich  had  surrendered. 
Soon  the  mountains  were  all  shrouded  in  rain-clouds, 
and  I  trudged  back  to  Podgoritza. 

Filing  was  heavy  in  the  afternoon.  I  borrowed  a 
horse  from  the  barracks,  and,  for  the  first  time  in 
my  life,  rode  out  quite  alone.  A  horrible  and  con- 
tinuous fire  of  rifles  and  machine-guns  raged  just 
behind  the  little  hill  of  Eogom  ahead  of  me. 

But,  though  it  was  evident  that  with  no  big  guns 
the  Turks  could  not  hold  out  long,  nothing  resulted 
that  day. 

Tramping  round  Podgoritza  at  night  to  find  Zhivko- 
vitch,  the  Renter  Press  censor,  was  maddening,  as  he 
never  appeared  till  he  had  got  his  own  messages  well 
off.  But  as  I  know  Servian,  I  translated  mine  to  the 
Governor,  and  got  him  to  sign  it,  and  got  it  off  before 
Zhivkovitch  knew,  once  or  twice. 

Rogom  fell  next  morning  at  seven.  I  met  some 
very  hungry  soldiers  on  the  plain,  and  got  the  news 
from  them  in  exchange  for  some  bread;  for  the  com- 
missariat (or  "  intendanz,'"  as  it  was  called)  was  not 
yet  organized,  and  only  those  men  who  managed  to 
get  food  from  home  had  anything  to  eat. 

A  heap  of  wounded — the  results  of  Dechich — began 
to  come  in.  They  were  crammed  into  the  barracks. 
Nothing  and  no  one  was  ready  for  them,  and  Matano- 
vitch  came  down  from  Cettigne  to  tackle  297  wounded 
almost  single-handed.     All  the  dregs  of  Podgoritza 


WAR  191 

and  a  mass  of  small  children  put  on  Red  Crosses,  and 
swarmed  to  the  barracks.  But  of  trained  help  there 
was  none,  and  the  authorities  had  decided  not  to 
admit  any  foreign  help  or  doctors  into  theii-  hospitals 
to  see  the  shocking  mess  they  were  in. 

Little  Princess  Vera  arrived  in  a  motor,  leapt  out 
and  cried,  wrmgmg  her  hands:  "  It  is  terrible,  terrible; 
there  are  wounded  men  !  Mon  Dieu  !  mon  Dieu  ! 
what  shall  we  do  ? "  It  was  evident  she  had  expected 
none. 

Corresponding  was  for  me  a  mere  by-product.  I 
was  there  to  watch  the  situation  for  myself  and  do 
relief  work.  So  I  went  to  the  barracks  to  see  if  I 
could  help.  Matanovitch,  reeling  with  fatigue  after 
a  day  and  night  of  continuous  work,  begged  me  to 
go  out  and  look  for  wounded.  A  Bohemian  engineer 
had  also  volunteered  for  this,  and  together  we 
collected  some  necessaries,  for  the  Red  Cross  was  in 
too  great  confusion  to  supply  anything.  But  nearly 
all  the  wounded  were  ah-eady  in,  and  we  found  little 
to  do  on  the  Zeta  plaui. 

^^  Next  day,  however,  Matanovitch  cried  out  to  me: 
''  I  recognized  your  dressing  on  that  bayoneted  boy. 
Go  as  near  the  front  as  you  can.  We  are  very  short- 
handed.'' 

Two  Gruda  Albanians,  slightly  wounded,  told  me 
that  Gruda  had  been  among  the  fii'st  on  Dechich,  and 
had  lost  fifty-two  killed  and  wounded,  and  that  the 
top  of  Dechich  was  knee-deep  m  dead  Turks.  So 
quick  had  been  the  final  rush  on  the  stronghold  that 
the  Turks  fled  without  putting  their  guns  out  of  gear, 
and  the  retreating  Nizams  were  shot  down  with  their 
own   artillery.     There    had   been   frightful   jealousy 


192        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

between  the  Maltsors  and  the  Montenegrins  as  to 
which  should  get  first  into  Dechich.  These  two  men 
rejoiced  naively  like  children,  for  one  had  taken  ten 
and  the  other  six  Turkish  Mausers.  The  Monte- 
negrin censor,  however,  would  allow  no  mention  of 
the  Maltsors  to  be  made,  and  pretended  that  Dechich 
had  been  taken  by  Montenegrins  alone,  though  at  the 
same  time  they  cursed  loud  and  deep  because  the 
Maltsors  had  captured  and  carried  off  all  the  artillery 
mules  and  pack-horses  from  Dechich — a  pretty  good 
proof  that  they  were  first  in. 

A  certain  halfpenny  paper,  it  should  be  noted, 
published  a  photograph  of  a  great  "  castle  in  Spain,'' 
with  towers  and  castellations,  of  a  style  quite  impos- 
sible in  the  Balkan  Peninsula,  and  called  it  Dechich. 
Nor  was  this  by  any  means  the  only  bogus  photo- 
graph published.  The  silly  craze  for  getting  a  thing  out 
quickly,  without  giving  possible  time  for  inquirmg  into 
its  truth,  makes  a  large  proportion  of  so-called  "  news ' 
mere  rubbish  to  gull  the  public.  "  What  is  that?" 
asked  an  Albanian  priest.  "It  is  called  Dechich  in 
this  English  paper !"  I  said.  He  stared,  and  added 
disgustedly:  "People  say  the  English  are  truthful. 
English  papers  are,  it  seems,  as  bad  as  all  the  rest.'' 
And  he  threw  it  down,  disgusted.* 

The  great  bare  suimnit  of  Dechich  stood  sharp 
against  the  sky.  I  felt  hot  with  shame.  Nor  could 
I  again  get  up  any  interest  in  corresponding,  haunted 
always  by  the  dread  of  similar  occurrences.     And 

*  Since  writing  the  above,  I  have  looked  through  back 
numbers  of  illustrated  papers,  and  am  disgusted  by  the  gross 
carelessness  which  permitted  photographs  even  of  Caucasians  to 
be  sold  to  the  public  as  Balkan  subjects. 


WAR  193 

even  the  most  accurate  and  conscientious  of  journalists 
are  always  liable  to  have  tlieir  facts  distorted  by 
picturesque  and  wholly  false  details,  added,  I  presume, 
by  the  office-boy. 

Montenegro  was  stunned  and  stupefied  by  the 
amount  of  wounded.  The  charge  had  been  a  quite 
mad  one — a  race  to  be  first  in,  between  the  Maltsors 
and  Montenegrins.  The  leaders  of  both  were  killed, 
though  in  the  hospitals  there  were,  I  believe,  at  least 
tlu-ee  men  petted  as  "  the  first  man  in  Dechich." 

The  Montenegrins  showed  once  and  for  all  that 
their  idea  of  fighting  was  that  of  their  medieval 
ballads:  "Da  uchinimo  jurish  !"  (Let  us  charge!). 
They  rushed  like  a  pack  of  wolves,  howling  war-cries, 
and  had  no  notion  of  how^  to  take  cover  or  spread. 
It  w^as  this  which  brought  about  Montenegro's  high 
death-roll. 

News  came  in  at  once  that  the  Montenegrms,  owing 
to  not   having  kept  a  good  lookout,  had  been  am- 
bushed at  night  on  the  other  side  of  the  lake  at  Zogaj, 
and   badly   cut   up.     Matanovitch   rushed   back   to 
Cettigne  for  the  wounded  who  resulted.     In  capturing 
this    position,    the    Montenegrins    had    committed 
atrocities,  and  eight  hon-ibly  mutilated  bodies  were 
taken  into  Scutari,  one  of  them  that  of  a  Turkish 
officer.     The  photograph  of  a  noseless,  lipless  head, 
then  taken  by  Mi".  Marubbi  of  Scutari,  has  already 
been  published.     The  clotted  blood  shows  that  the 
victim  was  alive  when  mutilated,  for  corpses  do  not 
bleed  so. 

Meanwhile,  on  our  side  of  the  war,  the  Montenegrin 
army  had  worked  round  behind  Dechich,  having  been 
given   free   pass   through    the   Albanian    tribelands. 

13 


194        THE  STEUGGLE  FOE  SCUTAEI 

Moreover,  the  Kastrati  and  Skreli  men  on  ahead 
attacked  the  Moslem  villages  on  the  Lake  border, 
and  opened  the  route.  News  came  that  the  Monte- 
negrins had  burnt  a  number  of  Moslem  villages  on  the 
Antivari  side. 

On  Sunday,  October  13,  the  Alaj-bariak  and  the 
band  were  made  ready  to  march  into  Tuzi,  which,  it 
was  believed,  must  fall  at  once.  The  guns  of  its  fort, 
Shipchanik,  had  fired  half  the  night,  and  ceased  sud- 
denly, so  we  presumed  their  ammunition  was  ex- 
hausted.   A   summons   to   surrender  was   sent   the 


SKETCH  ON  FIELD:  MONTENEGRrST  SOLDIERS  GOING  TO  SHIPCHANIK. 

town.  The  Commandant  replied  by  demanding  per- 
mission to  retu'e  with  his  men  to'  Scutari,  and  was 
refused.  Montenegro  shifted  her  big  guns  down  to 
the  plain  near  the  town,  and  next  morning  Tuzi  was 
bombarded  from  six  points,  including  the  summit  of 
Dechich.  It  surrendered  at  once.  At  2.30,  with  the 
Bohemian  engineer  and  a  green  omnibus,  I  went  to 
Urzhanitzki  Most,  the  frontier  bridge,  to  give  first 
aid,  if  necessary,  and  see  the  formal  surrender.  Three 
or  four  wounded  Nizams,  one  with  his  breast  muscles 
ripped  up  by  a  bayonet,  needed  dressing,  and  drank 
water  greedily. 


Montenk(;rin.s  occii'Vim;  the  Tl  kk.i.->ii  iuuiki^>  Shik  iia.n;k 
im.mkdiatei.v  after  its  strrender. 


^^^^fc-^J^' " 

r 

.,„    f'^* 

-»''^ 

^F' 

■\:,  •• 

I  )Ki   MH    II    AMI    Mil.    m    kN  I     I'i    kKl^ri    l.i  '  "    nip'i    ^i.    i  K'  'M    i    i. /:  ii  A  S  i  r  /  K  I    M<>>1. 

<  )i    r<»KER    14.     191 2 


WAR  195 

Then  time  passed  slowly.  Prince  Danilo  and  the 
white  charger  and  the  band  were  all  ready.  Dusk 
fell.  Flames  leapt  up  from  Vladnje  and  Vranje. 
The  soldiers  had  set  fire  to  them.  The  little  crowd 
of  Montenegi'ins  rejoiced.  I  exclaimed — for  I  knew 
only  too  well  the  horror  of  burnt  homesteads — and 
remembered,  too,  Montenegro's  loud  indignation  at 
"  Turkish  savagery  "  last  year.  But  an  old  woman 
cried:  "  Burn  !  Let  them  burn  !  I  am  very  glad.'' 
And  all  said:  "  They  are  Moslems.  Let  them  burn  \" 
The  band  struck  up  a  lively  march  as  a  battalion 
started  for  Shipchanik  and  crossed  the  bridge.  The 
orange  sunset  deepened  into  burning  red,  upon  which 
the  hills  were  very  blue.  The  blazing  villages  weie 
crimson  spots,  and  over  all  crept  up  a  sUm  crescent 
moon,  as  though  the  sign  of  the  Turk  were  dying, 
pallid,  in  a  sea  of  blood. 

It  was  5.30  when,  through  the  gathering  darkness, 
the  long  line  of  prisoners  came  in  sight  with  the 
Turkish  Pasha  at  their  head.  He  dismounted  at  the 
bridge,  came  forward  on  foot,  and  offered  his  sword 
to  Prince  Danilo,  who  bent  down  from  his  white  horse, 
took  it,  and  returned  it,  and  announced  at  the  same 
time  that  as  a  reward  of  victory  Major  Bechir  was 
promoted  to  the  rank  of  Brigadier.  Then  came  the 
surrendered  garrison,  rank  after  rank,  out  of  the 
darkness,  trailing  over  the  plain  like  a  snake.  A 
stupendous  sight:  several  thousand  able-bodied  men 
— all  prisoners.  I  thought  of  a  drawing  I  had  once 
made  of  a  Roman  triumj^h.  Poor  devils  !  They  had 
better  have  made  a  dash  for  Scutari,  and  died  fighting. 
A  large  number  perished  slowly  later  of  cold  and 
misery.     All  the  garrisons  of  Tuzi,  Vranje,  Nenhelm, 


196        THE  STEUGGLE  FOE  SCUTAEI 

Eogom — the  entire  frontier  guard — gave  itself  up.  In 
five  days  something  like  5,000  prisoners  were  taken, 
and  Montenegro's  head  was  completely  turned. 

Next  day  the  engineer  and  I  drove  on  to  Tuzi  with 
a  bus-load  of  various  necessities.  Little  white  rags 
flew  from  sticks  on  many  a  house,  and  chalked  crosses 
on  the  doors  appealed  for  mercy.  A  dead  horse  in 
the  midst  stank  sickeningly.  We  reported  ourselves, 
and  went  straight  to  the  military  hospital.  The 
Turkish  doctors  in  charge  demanded  angrily  to  be 
allowed  to  go  to  Scutari,  and  were  amazed  to  learn 
that  it  was  war,  and  not  a  mere  frontier  af!air,  that 
was  taking  place.  That  the  other  Balkan  States 
were  about  to  attack,  was  news  that  stunned  them. 

The  hospital  was  crammed  with  wounded  Nizams, 
and  was  foodless  and  waterless.  The  engineer  went 
off  to  fetch  a  bus-load  of  water  in  cans  from  the  river. 
I  remained  to  clean  up.  Having  been  quite  cut  off  for 
a  week,  the  place  was  in  a  terrible  state.  Two  shells 
had  gone  through  the  building  in  spite  of  its  hospital 
flag.  It  had  been  impossible  to  clean  anything,  and 
the  floor  was  thick  with  dirty  wads  and  dressings, 
and  old  petroleum  cans  full  of  putrid  blood  and  pus. 
The  Turkish  doctor,  furious,  demanded  in  broken 
German  proper  treatment  for  his  wounded,  and  re- 
fused to  help,  saying  he  was  not  now  responsible.  I 
made  a  bonfire,  and  worked  a  long  time  burning  dirty 
dressings  and  carrying  out  the  blood -cans.  He  then 
saw  I  really  wanted  to  help,  and  put  on  some  orderlies 
to  work  also.  The  engineer  brought  bread  and  water, 
and  we  made  some  sort  of  order  in  the  place.  I  had 
till  then  been  too  busy  to  investigate  the  actual 
Vv'ounded.     The  doctor  now  pointed  out  eight  men 


WAR  197 

with  bandages  round  tlieir  faces,  close  and  flat. 
There  was  no  nose  or  lip.  He  imitated  slicing. 
"  Look !  Montenegrin  work  \"  Eight  men,  not 
otherwise  wounded,  had  been  deliberately  caught  and 
mutilated.     Kovachevitch's  words  had  come  true. 

The  doctor  wished  me  to  tell  Europe.  I  was  in  a 
painful  position.  When  acting  as  correspondent,  I 
had  undertaken  to  reveal  no  secrets  detrimental  to 
Montenegro,  and  had  cheerfully  promised,  believing 
this  to  mean  the  position  of  troops,  guns,  etc.  But 
to  hide  such  foul  deeds  was  another  thing.  I  worked 
the  whole  day,  sweeping,  and  burning,  and  wrestling 
with  the  disgusting  problem  of  the  mutilated  men. 

At  night  I  returned  to  Podgoritza,  and,  having 
decided  that  "  honesty  is  the  best  policy,"  I  found 
Jovitchevitch,  the  late  Montenegrin  Consul  in  Scutari, 
and  told  him  in  strong  terms  what  I  had  seen  and 
what  I  thought  of  it.  I  would  not  report  it  this  time, 
but  there  must  not  be  any  more.  The  result  was 
that  the  correspondents,  a  mixed  squad  of  whom  were 
collected  at  Podgoritza,  were  not  allowed  to  go  for- 
ward till  the  mutilated  men  were  hidden. 

The  next  day  the  engineer  and  I  spent  in  prepar- 
ing to  advance  and  in  feeding  the  hospital.  Getting 
a  flock  of  sheep,  for  mutton,  and  pemiing  them  in  an 
outbuilding,  delayed  us  so  that  we  had  to  sleep  one 
night  more  In  the  hospital  dispensar}\  It  was  too 
late  to  start. 

The  woe  of  the  conquered  had  already  begun.  The 
newly  ai)pointod  Montenegrin  Governor  of  Tuzi — 
Gjurashkovitch — proceeded  to  "rub  it  iji"  by  hanging 
a  portrait  of  King  Nikola  in  the  hospital,  and  joj-fully 
informing  the  Turkish  stafl'  that  the  Montenegrins 


198        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

had  occupied  Plava  and  Gusiiije,  and,  of  2,000 
Moslems  who  had  endeavoured  to  retake  Berani,  had 
slaughtered  all  but  250. 

The  doctor  was  terribly  anxious  about  his  horse. 
He  loved  it  as  a  child,  he  said,  and  dreaded  lest  one 
of  the  many  looting  Montenegrins  or  Maltsors  should 
steal  and  maltreat  it.  Lootmg  was  in  full  swing. 
Strmgs  of  Montenegrin  women  were  filing  across  the 
plam  from  the  surrounding  houses  and  villages,  bent 
double  under  bales  of  clothing,  tobacco,  household 
gear,  and  what  not.  "  What  have  you  there,  mother  ? 
I  cried  to  an  old  woman  halting  on  the  bridge. 
*'  Clothes,"  said  she — "  beautiful  clothes.''  "  Where 
did  you  steal  them?"  "I  didn't  steal  them,"  she 
cried  furiously;  "  I  took  them  out  of  a  house."  "  H 
you  take  the  children's  clothes,  they  will  die  of  cold 
in  the  winter."  "  So  they  shall,  God  willing.  They 
are  all  Moslems." 

Nearly  all  the  greatcoats  and  blankets  of  the  un- 
hajjpy  Nizam  prisoners  w^ere  looted.  "  Save  my 
little  horse  from  these  brigands,"  prayed  the  doctor. 
**  You  had  better  sell  it  to  me,"  said  I,  suddenly 
inspired.  He  was  loath  to  part,'  but  realized  he 
must  sell  or  be  robbed.  We  clapped  his  saddle  on  it. 
I  mounted,  glided  smoothly,  swiftly  through  walk 
and  trot  to  canter,  turned,  dismounted,  and  con- 
cluded the  deal  in  five  minutes;  and  so,  dirt  cheap, 
did  I  acquire  the  Houyhnhnm,  five  and  a  half  years 
old,  sound  as  sense,  and  sweetly  gentle,  and  fulfilled 
my  lifelong  desire  to  possess  a  horse. 

I  promised  the  doctor  to  take  great  care  of  his  pet, 
and  he  begged  me  to  carry  a  letter  for  him  to  a  friend 
m  Scutari.     "  I  cannot,"  said  I.     "  Not  even  with 


Thk  HorvHNHNM. 


I'lll,    Mti.N  1  l.M.i.KlN.-.    IN     Tl/.; 


WAR  199 

your  horse  shall  I  get  there  now."  "  What  \"  cried 
Gjurashkovitch;  "  not  get  to  Scutari  ?  Why  not  ? 
We  are  going  to  take  it  iji  four  days/'  "  No  army 
can  take  Scutari  in  four  days,"  said  I.  "  It  is  very 
strongly  fortified."  Gjurashkovitch  and  his  officers 
laughed  contempt.  "  Ladies  know  nothing  of  mili- 
tary things."  "  I  know  what  barbed  wire  is,  though," 
said  I.  "  I  had  friends  in  the  Transvaal."  "  Oh, 
for  the  English,  perhaps,"  cried  they,  "  but  for  us 

Montenegrins Do  you  know  what  we  shall  do 

with  this  beautiful  barbed  wire  ?  We  shall  do  this." 
And  the  speaker  clipped  the  air  with  finger  and 
thumb. 

I  had  not  spent  the  winter  in  Scutari  for  nothing, 
and  knew  that  there  were  guns  in  bombproof  em- 
placements out  on  the  plain.  These  fellows  had  had 
a  whole  year  to  spy  the  land,  and  if  they  had  failed 
to  do  so,  it  was  not  my  affair.  That  they  had  the 
physical  courage  of  wild  boars  I  was  aware,  but 
having  seen  and  heard  them  booze  and  boast  for 
months  on  end  I  had  no  behef  in  then:  science.  So 
I  laughed.  "  You  will  see  in  a  few  days,"  they  said. 
''  We  shall,"  said  I.     And  we  did. 

I  slung  my  saddle-bags  on  the  Houyhnhnm,  and 
started  for  the  war  with  a  blanket-sack  and  six  tins 
of  sardines. 


CHAPTER  XII 

"  The  things  that  I  have  seen  and  heard, 
In  field  and  camp  and  barrack  too — 
I  tells  them  over  to  myself, 
And  sometimes  wonders  if  they're  true." 

It  had  poured  in  blinding  torrents  for  two  days. 
The  engineer  and  I  slopped  through  mud  to  the  arm 
of  the  lake  at  Nenhehn.  The  green  omnibus  lum- 
bered after  us.  The  ferry  was  entirely  blocked  by 
artillery.  The  soldiers  were  camped  in  mud  and 
water;  the  two  unburnt  houses  remaining  were 
occupied  by  officers.  The  Commandant  said  he  could 
not  take  the  Red  Cross  bus  till  the  guns  were  over; 
in  any  case,  would  not  take  the  horses.  They  must 
go  round  by  the  mountain-track.  There  w^as  no 
knowmg  when  the  ferry  would  be  clear,  so  I  started 
at  once  over  the  Chafa  Kishat  along  with  the  am- 
munition horses. 

The  top  of  the  pass  was  all  great  wet  boulders  with 
deep  mud-holes  between  all  churned  up  by  the  traffic, 
and  far  too  bad  to  ride  over.  I  stumbled  and  climbed 
for  two  hours  in  a  clattering  jam  of  ammunition 
horses,  slithering  and  falling  here,  there,  and  every- 
where, and  being  mercilessly  flogged  to  their  feet 
again.  At  the  other  side  of  the  pass  the  convoy 
halted  for  the  night.  I  pushed  on,  and  so  did  two 
young  Montenegrins.     They  had  never  been  over  the 

200 


WAR 


201 


border  before,  and  followed  me.  We  rounded  the 
head  of  the  lake  by  moonlight,  and  plunged  into  a 
dark  unknown  track.  The  Houyhnhnm  felt  his  way 
wearily  over  loose  stones  and  through  deep  mud.  I 
wondered  if  we  should  find  a  roof  over  our  heads  that 
night.  Something  loomed  white,  and  I  hailed  it. 
Two  Maltsors  cried  enthusiastically  out  of  the  dark- 
ness: "  It  is  the  Queen  !  Come  with  us.''  I  turned 
of!  the  track,  and  followed  them  to  a  great  half- 
burnt  house  that  had  thi'ee  rooms  intact.  The  two 
young  Montenegrins  came,  too,  gladly.  A  crowd  of 
insurgents  rose  to  greet  me  when  I  entered.     It  was 


MONTENEGRIK  CAMP  AT  VIR   KASTEATIT,   OCTOBER,    1912. 


the  house  of  Dedush  Marashi  of  Vukpalaj,  and  a 
great  caldron  of  mutton  hung  over  the  fire  ready 
for  all  comers.  The  company  ate  hungrily,  and, 
havmg  done  so,  turned  to  the  east  and  chanted  a 
long  and  impressive  prayer  for  victory,  before  casting 
themselves  upon  the  floor  to  sleep. 

October  21  saw  us  start  at  5.30  a.m.,  but  on 
arriving  at  Vii-  Kastratit,  the  opposite  side  of  the 
ferry,  there  was  no  green  bus  and  no  engineer.  Nor 
did  anyone  think  them  likely  to  arrive.  Hideous 
confusion  reigned  everj^^here.  I  walked  tlu-ough  the 
camp  of  cursing,  hungry  men.     No  rations  had  been 


202        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

served  out  to  them,  and  they  were  climbing  trees  for 
any  kind  of  eatable  seed  or  berry,  and  searching 
for  blackberries  in  the  hedge.  I  gnawed  crusts  of 
bread,  of  w^hich  I  had  a  pocketful,  and  fed  the 
Houyhnhnm  with  the  hay  which  lay  about  in  tons 
trampled  under  foot.  It  had  been  commandeered 
wholesale. 

The  guns  were  coming  up  from  the  water's  edge, 
and  mules  and  ponies  struggled  desperately  in  harness 
made  for  full-sized  horses,  which  slipped  and  twisted. 
The  wheels  sank  deep  in  the  sucking  mud.  The  un- 
happy beasts,  who  could  get  no  purchase  on  the  loose 
collars,  that  reached  almost  to  their  knees,  floundered 
under  volleys  of  lashes  and  heaved  the  gun  up  the 
bank,  only  to  fall  again. 

I  had  been  told  at  Podgoritza  that  I  should  be  able 
to  obtain  all  necessary  rations  from  the  camps;  but 
I  meant  to  have  something  better  than  hay  and 
blackberries,  so,  when  Padre  Lorenzo,  the  Franciscan 
of  the  district,  rode  up  on  his  ferocious  bay  stallion, 
I  accepted  his  invitation  to  go  with  him. 

All  day  we  rode  round  the  district  visiting  the 
dismayed  peasantry.  Akeady  they  w^ere  vaguely 
alarmed  at  the  results  of  calling  in  Montenegrin  help. 
Prince  Danilo  had  been  distributmg  a  lot  of  Monte- 
negrin caps,  which  they  had  taken  as  a  joke  at  first. 
Now  they  asked  what  it  meant.  They  did  not  wish 
to  wear  the  badge  of  Montenegrin  subjects.  That 
night  I  wrote  in  my  diary:  "  The  Montenegrin  troops 
are  consuming  all  the  hay,  to  be  paid  for  at  some 
future  date  when  the  beasts  are  dead  for  want  of  it. 
People  all  say  they  are  sick  of  war — have  had  two 
years  of  it  now.     Many  have  leapt  from  early  middle 


WAR  203 

age  to  old  age.  They  are  all  worn  and  haggard.  The 
land  Ls  all  ploughed  up  by  artillery  and  pack-horses. 
God  knows  how  it  will  all  end." 

A  doleful  day  enough,  and  at  night  I  unsaddled  the 
poor  Houyhnhnni,  to  find  that  my  hosts  of  last  night 
had  put  the  saddle-bags  on  unskilfully,  and  that  a 
buckle  had  cut  a  deep  hole  on  his  quarter. 

October  22. — The  engineer  never  turned  up,  and 
Padre  Lorenzo  had  other  work,  so  I  decided  to  push 
on  alone,  but  (fur  the  sake  of  the  Houyhnhnm's  back, 
w^hich  I  had  touched  up  with  an  antiseptic)  left  the 
saddle-bags  behind,  and  with  only  the  blanket  and 
the  sardines  followed  some  natives  to  Kopliku.  The 
Houyhnhnm,  I  may  mention,  healed  up  beautifully, 
but  my  own  back  and  all  the  rest  of  me  suffered  in 
consequence,  for  Padre  Lorenzo  locked  up  his  house 
and  followed  on,  and  I  remained  baggageless  for  the 
rest  of  the  trip. 

Kopliku  was  a  seething  mass  of  soldiers,  artiller}^ 
and  mud — worse,  if  possible,  than  Vii-  Kastratit. 
There  were  not  nearly  enough  tents,  and  no  one 
seemed  to  know  where  anyone  else  was.  I  made  for 
the  Maltsors,  as  most  likely  to  help  me,  and  found 
Sokol  Batzi  and  his  son  and  all  the  Gruda  men. 
They  told  me  to  stick  to  them,  and  along  with  the 
heads  I  crowded  into  a  big  Maltsor  house.  The  host 
was  a  Moslem  cousin  of  Sokol's,  an  anti-Turk  Moslem, 
so  his  house  had  escaped  burning.  Rain  fell  in 
torrents,  and  there  was  no  cover  for  the  huge 
crowd. 

Padre  Lorenzo  arrived,  and  Padre  Marko  of 
Triepshi,  and  Doni  Ernesto  of  Rioli.  The  guns  of 
Tarabosh  boomed  in  the  distance,  and  a  still'  fight 


204        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

was  reported  to  be  taking  place  between  the  Dukagini 
and  the  Moslems  of  Vorfaj. 

General  Lazavitch,  commanding  under  the  Genera- 
lissimo, Prince  Danilo,  sent,  so  I  learnt  later,  a  letter, 
which  is  still  extant,  to  the  Dukagin  tribes,  inviting 
them  to  help  take  the  Moslem  villages,  and  promising 
they  should  share  the  spoils  equally  with  Montenegro. 
The  tribesmen,  anxious  to  take  what  they  considered 
legitimate  vengeance  upon  the  Moslems,  who,  armed 
and  incited  last  year  b}^  Bedri  Pasha,  had  plundered 
the  Christian  villages,  came  down. 

The  Montenegrins  had,  however,  summoned  them 
as  "  cat's-paws,"  meaning  to  use  them  as  fighting  men, 
and  then  throw  all  the  blame  on  them.  The  Monte- 
negrin soldiers,  under  the  direction  of  their  officers, 
seized  all  loot  worth  having,  loaded  it  upon  the  gangs 
of  women  who  had  come  for  the  purpose,  and  sent  it 
under  escort  to  Podgoritza.  The  Maltsors  came  off 
very  much  "  second  best." 

Moreover,  blood  is  thicker  than  water.  The  Malt- 
sors had  thought  of  the  sort  of  intertribal  plunder  of 
old  days — a  tit-for-tat  affair.  When  they  saw  the 
awful  slaughter  and  havoc  wrought  by  the  Monte- 
negrins, and  the  outrages  committed  on  women  and 
children,  they  were  filled  with  pity  for  theii'  wretched 
Moslem  brethren,  and  sheltered  and  fed  many  of 
them  in  the  mountains  throughout  the  winter.  This 
made  the  Montenegrins  furious,  and  was  quite  unex- 
pected by  them.  They  had  meant  their  victims  to 
starve.     But  of  this  more  later. 

October  23. — A  dismal  rainy  morning.  Our  sopped 
horses  stood  miserable  in  puddles.  I  went  with  Dom 
Ernesto  to  the  headquarters  of  the  General  Stafi'.     It 


WAR  205 

was  the  house  of  the  Bairaktar  of  Koplikii,  and,  ex- 
cept the  one  in  which  I  was  quartered,  was  the  only- 
Moslem  house  left  unburn t.  It  had  been  saved  on 
purj^ose  to  be  used  as  headquarters,  but  had  been 
completely  looted.  Princes  Mirko  and  Petar  were 
there,  and  Jovan  Plamenatz,  Minister  of  the  Interior, 
now  acting  as  director  of  the  "  intendanz  "  (commis- 
sariat). This,  under  his  skilful  management,  had 
broken  down  completely.  He  had  only  had  boiled 
maize  to  eat,  and  was  very  sorry  for  himself.  I,  who 
had  fared  sumptuously  with  my  tribesmen,  merely 
thought  it  funny, 

I  asked  Plamenatz  how  I  could  best  help  with  the 
wounded,  and  found  no  arrangements  of  any  kind 
had  been  made.  A  Montenegrin  doctor  was  there 
with  some  cases  of  materials,  of  the  contents  of 
which  he  professed  ignorance.  He  did  not  expect 
many  wounded.  Such  as  there  were  would  have  to 
walk  to  him;  he  was  not  going  to  them.  I  urged  the 
necessity  of  dressing  a  wound  at  once  to  prevent 
infection.  "  Oh,  if  they  get  pus,"  said  he,  "  they 
must  die.     I  shall  have  no  time  to  clean  them." 

The  Princesses,  too,  were  interested  in  w^ounded, 
and  so  the  field  hospital  must  be  in  a  quite  safe  place 
away  from  the  front.  Plamenatz  took  no  interest 
whatever  in  wounded.  Confident  that  Scutari  would 
fall  hi  a  day  or  two,  he  discussed  absurd  plans  for 
taking  Durazzo  and  Dibra. 

I  rode  out  with  Dom  Ernesto.  No  big  attack  was 
as  yet  possible,  as  the  big  Montenegrin  guns  were  not 
up.  Stniggling  teams  were  heaving  them  panifully 
tlu-ough  mud  a  foot  and  more  deep. 

We  met  the  enghieer,  who  had  just  arrived,  and 


206        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

had  been  told  off  to  put  up  the  military  telegraph- 
wire,  which  was  to  follow  the  troops,  who  were  already 
advancuig.  Small  fights  were  scattered  about  on  the 
plain  below,  and  had  no  particular  results.  The  guns 
of  Tarabosh  boomed  regularly.  We  watched  the 
sudden  white  fuffs  of  smoke  rising  alternately  from 
the  Turkish  and  Montenegrin  strongholds. 

On  the  24th  Tarabosh  silenced  suddenly,  and  the 
tale  flew  round  that  it  had  fallen  !  "  Martinovitch 
will  shift  his  big  gmis  from  Rumia  to  Tarabosh,  and 
Scutari  will  surrender  in  a  day  or  two."  And  they 
added  triumphantly:  "  We  told  you  so  !"  The  truth, 
so  I  was  told  later,  was  that  the  King  was  so  anxious 
that  Prmce  Danilo  should  have  the  glory  of  taking 
Scutari  that  he  ordered  Martmovitch  not  to  be  too 
quick  about  taking  Tarabosh. 

Next  morning  came  our  marching  orders  to  advance 
at  once.  A  sheep  had  been  set  roasting  early,  in 
anticipation  of  a  move.  We  wolfed  a  savage  meal, 
and  started  on  a  beast  of  a  ride  in  a  torrent  of  rain. 
All  along  the  route  we  met  parties  of  Montenegrin 
women  loaded  with  loot,  and  some  of  them  wreathed 
with  new  telegraph-wire.  As  we  passed,  one  made  a 
dash  at  the  hedge,  and  began  hauling  down  the 
telegraph-line  put  up  only  yesterday  by  the  engmeer. 
"  Oy,  you  !"  I  shouted;  "  you  mustn't  take  that  \" 
"  We  shall  take  everything  we  find  \"  they  screeched. 
And  down  came  that  military  line. 

Just  before  reaching  Gruemir  we  passed  under  the 
noses  of  the  two  big  guns  brought  up  the  day  before. 
The  gunners,  wild  to  open  fire,  yelled  to  us  to  hurry 
on,  but  the  Maltsors  paid  no  heed,  and  we  trailed  by 
in  a  long  straggly  line  at  our  owm  pace.     Passing  the 


WAR  207 

headquarters,  I  shouted  to  young  Vrbitza,  the  Prince's 
Aide:  "  Your  women  are  destroying  the  telegraph." 

"  I  know,  I  know,"  he  returned,  with  gestures  of 
despair.     "  What  can  one  do  ?     It  is  terrible  !" 

Two  of  the  Franciscans  had  already  found  quarters 
at  Gruemir,  and  I,  and  Nikola  Batzi,  and  the  rest  of 
the  priests  all  crowded  in.  Old  Sokol  and  the  food 
never  turned  up.  We  shared  the  sardines  brought 
by  Doni  Ernesto  and  me,  covered  the  earthen  floor 
thick  with  hay,  and  burrowed  into  it  for  the  night. 
Tack-tack-tack-tack  rattled  suddenly  out  of  the  dis- 


CAMP  COOKEEY. 


tance.  We  leapt  into  our  soaked  coats  and  boots, 
and  rushed,  stumbling  over  the  rocks,  up  the  little 
hill  hard  by  to  get  a  view.  A  fight  was  going  on,  on 
the  plain  below.  The  contiimous  uncanny  rattle  of 
the  Turkish  machine-guns  came  out  of  the  darkness; 
thunderous  reports  of  the  two  big  Montenegrin  guns 
shook  the  earth  as  the  shells  tore  past  us  every  few 
minutes.  The  Turks  had  attempted  a  surprise  near 
V'raka.  Down  came  the  rain  again  in  torrents.  The 
firing  died  away.  We  returned  to  our  hut,  and  occa- 
sional droppuig  fire  punctuated  the  ceaseless  patter 
of  the  rain.  At  2  a.m.  tiie  big  guns  again  shook  the 
hut.     It  occun-ed   to   iiic   that   milv   a   line   of   half- 


208        THE  STRUGGLE  FOE  SCUTARI 

starved,  sopped  men  were  between  me  and  a  hideous 
death,  but  it  all  seemed  so  unreal  that  I  curled  deep 
into  my  blanket-sack  and  slept  like  a  dog. 

Saturday,  October  26. — A  grey  chill  dawn,  all  veiled 
in  rain.  We  lit  a  fire,  and  as  there  was  nothing  to 
eat,  Dom  Ernesto  generously  served  out  a  nip  of  his 
private  rum  all  round.  I  collected  some  maize-cobs, 
roasted  them  in  the  ashes,  and,  gnawing  them  as  I 
walked,  went  to  see  the  soldiers.  The  camp,  like  all 
Montenegrin  camps,  was  a  filthy  muck,  with  no 
attempt  at  sanitation — not  even  a  trench — and  men 
and  women  all  crowded  together  in  tiny  tents.  I 
understood  what  Major  Veshovitch  had  meant  when 
he  said:  "  For  us,  war  in  the  winter  will  be  far  better 
than  in  summer."  No  army  could  have  survived  a 
summer  campaign  in  such  camps  of  sewage  and  offal. 

The  army  was  busy  looting  huge  stores  of  maize 
left  in  the  deserted  Moslem  houses,  and  anything  else 
handy,  and  loading  it  on  the  women.  Everyone 
seemed  to  think  the  Moslems  had  left  for  ever.  They 
had,  in  point  of  fact,  fled  into  Scutari,  leaving  most 
of  their  goods  behind  them,  for  they  had  not  enough 
ammunition  to  offer  resistance.  The  Catholic  house 
where  we  were  quartered  bagged  a  hundred  hens. 

The  sun  came  out  with  extraordinary  brilliancy. 
Scutari  seemed  but  a  stone's-throw  distant.  I  could 
see  the  well-known  buildings  and  "  chinaar  i  madh," 
the  big  plane-tree  near  old  Marko's  house.  A  cold 
terror  seized  me  lest  a  shell  should  destroy  the  little 
house,  and  all  the  kindly  innocent  folk  within  it. 
Here  was  the  looting  army,  but  all  the  plain  was 
a-tinkle  with  sheep-bells.     It  was  like  a  mad  dream. 

Plamenatz  arrived  and  announced  a  great  Bulgar 


WAR  209 

victory.  We  had  only  beard  for  certain  two  days 
before  that  the  other  Balkan  States  had  begun.  A 
Balkan  Alliance,  we  w^ere  told,  had  been  signed  on 
September  18  for  three  years. 

A  large  number  of  Maltsors  arrived  from  Maltsia  e 
raadhe,  with  their  tribal  priests  and  headmen,  and  a 
big  general  attack  was  ordered  for  to-morrow.  We 
ate  two  of  the  looted  hens  to  be  ready  for  an  early 
start. 

Sunday,  October  27. — A  crowded,  suffocating  night, 
lulled  by  the  monotonous,  squelching  tramp  of  the 
troops  that  passed  continuously.  We  were  roused  at 
dawn,  and  ordered  to  follow  the  army  at  once,  and 
then  not  to,  but  to  wait  till  the  General  Staff  moved. 
The  big  guns  were  on  the  move  again,  and  the  attack 
postponed  till  they  were  in  place.  Our  division  then 
consisted  of  fifteen  battalions — that  is,  about  15,000 
men — and  the  Maltsors  as  well ;  and  the  j\Iontenegrins 
reckoned  to  take  Scutari  by  storm.  We  could  see 
black  smoke  and  flames  rise  up  ahead  as  the  advancing 
army  burnt  and  plundered. 

Monday,  October  28. — A  soldier,  straight  from  Pod- 
goritza,  brought  mc  a  week-old  telegram  from  Lord 
Lucas,  much  mangled  in  transmission.  I  made  out 
that  he  was  ready  to  send  a  surgeon  experienced  in 
field  -  work,  and  hurried  to  headquarters  expecting 
Plamenatz  to  be  pleased.  On  the  contrary,  he  was 
vexed  and  upset.  "  We  have  no  need  of  doctors," 
he  said.  I  protested  that  there  were  a  few  wounded 
coming  in  now  every  night,  and  that  there  would  soon 
be  more,  and  that  there  was  no  one  to  attend  to  them 
but  the  one  doctor  who  remained  behind  at  Kopliku. 
Plamenatz  replied  that  the  slightly  wounded  could 


210        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

walk  there,  and  as  for  serious  cases,  he  would  arrange 
later  to  take  them  by  steamer  to  Rijeka,  and  thence 
motor  them  in  freight-waggons  up  to  Cettigne.  I 
begged  that  he  would  at  least  let  Dom  Ernesto,  who 
is  medically  trained  and  very  skilful  with  wounds, 
have  some  material  from  the  Kopliku  store,  as  he 
and  I  would  then  dress  wounds  on  the  spot.  This, 
too,  he  refused  as  unnecessary.  I  believe  he  thought 
they  would  walk  into  Scutari  without  losing  a  man. 
I  pointed  out  that  an  answer  must  be  sent  to  the 
telegram,  and  he  dictated  a  reply  to  me,  which  he 
signed,  and  said  it  should  at  once  go  by  military  wire. 
Needless  to  say,  it  never  did. 

Twenty-five  Mirdites  came  in,  saying  Mirdita  was 
very  poorly  armed  and  short  of  ammunition,  and 
prayed  Plamenatz  for  weapons  for  the  tribe  that  they 
might  protect  their  own  land.  He  replied  that  he 
had  none  here.  They  must  wait  till  we  got  into 
Scutari  in  a  few  days,  when  there  would  be  weapons 
enough  for  all.  The  idea  that  the  Serbs  would  come 
over  Mirdita,  and  the  people  be  obliged  for  lack  of 
weapons  to  let  them  through,  had  possibly  occurred 
to  him. 

I  left  Plamenatz,  and  with  some  Maltsors  and  their 
priests  went  up  a  little  hill  behind  the  headquarters. 
The  general  attack  was  about  to  begin.  Some  be- 
lated Montenegrin  soldiers  straggled  past,  like  a  pack 
of  wild  creatures.  "  Those  poor  devils,"  said  one  of 
the  priests  prophetically,  "  will  never  storm  Scutari. 
Remember,  I  have  said  it."  The  Montenegrin  guns 
opened  fire  on  Golema.  I  knew  it  was  bomb-proof. 
Golema  replied.  Shot  after  shot  was  aimed  at  us,  or 
rather  at  the  village  just  below.     All  fell  short  on  a 


WAR  211 

bank  about  half  a  mile  away.  Some  burst,  and  the 
brown  bracken  flamed  in  patches;  many  fell  without 
exploding.  Our  guns  appeared  to  be  firing  straighter, 
but  had  no  eftect  whatever  on  the  bomb-proof.  Some 
Montenegrins,  of  the  staff,  climbed  up  to  us,  and  gazed 
through  glasses.  They  all  had  a  childlike  belief  that 
a  place  has  to  surrender  at  once,  so  soon  as  a  big  gun 
is  fired  at  it.  I  assured  them  you  can  go  on  firing 
for  months  on  end — for  example,  Ladysmith  and 
Mafeking — and  that  so  long  as  there  is  food  it  does 
not  greatly  matter. 

Suddenly  a  Turkish  shell  fell  just  alongside  a  house 
I  had  visited  yesterday,  and  a  burst  of  black  smoke 
followed.  A  man  was  killed.  Till  then,  none  of  us 
had  realized  we  were  being  fired  at.  A  second  fell  in 
almost  the  same  spot,  and  no  other.  They  fired  at 
the  former  range.  The  Turkish  firing  on  the  Monte- 
negrin battery  at  Vraka  was,  on  the  contrary,  good, 
and  the  latter  was  very  hard  pressed. 

The  bombardment  of  Scutari  was  to  begin  shortly. 
The  Catholic  priests  were  anxious  the  Catholic  quarter 
should  be  spared.  Dom  Ernesto  ran  off  to  the  gunners. 
They  replied  they  had  no  idea  which  part  was  Chris- 
tian and  which  Moslem.  It  is  an  amazing  fact  that, 
though  for  years  Scutari  had  been  a  mere  week-end 
trip  from  Cettigne,  and  though  for  the  past  year  any 
Montenegrin  officer  dressed  as  a  peasant  could  have 
driven  a  flock  of  sheep  to  market  there,  and  learnt 
the  lie  of  the  land  between  the  frontier  and  the  town, 
they  were  all  as  ignorant  of  the  country  as  though  it 
were  Central  Africa.  Absurd  funk  had  made  many 
Montenegrins  regard  a  trip  to  Scutari  as  highly  dan- 
gerous.    At  the  beginning  of  the  campaign  they  had 


212         THE  STEUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

no  maps,  and  as  these  were  published  at  Vienna,  had, 
subsequently,  much  difficulty  in  obtaining  any.  I 
refused  more  than  once  to  part  with  mine. 

Dom  Ernesto  indicated  the  quarters  of  the  town, 
and  at  3  p.m.  the  first  shots  were  fired,  aimed,  it  was 
said,  at  the  new  konak  and  old  barracks  in  the  middle 
of  the  town.  So  far  as  I  could  see,  all  fell  short  out- 
side the  town,  and  the  fire  soon  ceased.  The  military 
band,  meanwhile,  practised  industriously  every  even- 
ing in  preparation  for  the  triumphal  entry  into 
Scutari,  and  the  white  steed  and  the  Alaj-bariak  were 
all  ready. 

Tuesday,  October  29. — Great  uncertainty  as  to  move- 
ments. Rifle-fire  and  shrapnel  audible.  Nikola  Sokol 
Batzi,  who  was  acting  as  official  Albanian  interpreter, 
told  me  he  had  to  ride  forward  later  with  Plamenatz, 
but  would  probably  go  too  fast  for  me.  I  therefore 
started  alone  on  the  Houyhnhnm,  whom  I  had  cher- 
ished carefully,  and  with  whom  I  was  now  on  excel- 
lent terms.  It  was  quite  a  strange  trail  to  me.  I 
reached  the  ruined  church,  a  remnant  of  pre-Turkish 
days,  at  Rashi,  and  drew  rein.  A  multitude  of  troop- 
ploughed  tracks  branched  in  all  directions.  The  sun 
glanced  on  the  re-erected  military  wire,  and,  certain 
this  must  be  a  short-cut  to  headquarters,  I  followed 
it  straight  across  country.  Plamenatz  and  Nikola 
never  caught  me  up,  although  I  waited  a  bit  for  them, 
so,  as  the  most  important  thing  in  war  is  to  find 
quarters  before  they  are  all  taken,  I  pushed  on  to 
Boksi.  A  Montenegrin  officer  overtook  me,  asking  if 
I  knew  Plamenatz's  whereabouts.  We  cantered  on 
together,  drawing  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  sound  of 
continuous    rifle-fire.      The    Houyhnhnm,    being    a 


WAR 


213 


military  horse,  did  not  mind  a  bit,  nor  yet  for  the 
shells  which  began  to  hum  on  the  right.  Two 
Albanian  women  driving  a  donkey  with  their  house- 
hold goods  on  it,  met  us  in  mid- track,  and  shouted: 
"  Go  back  !  There  is  a  battle  down  there  !  We 
nearly  drove  the  donkey  into  it  I"     As  it  was  head- 


RUIN'S    OF   CHURfH    OF    RASHI. 


quarters,  and  not  the  grave,  that  we  were  in  search 
of,  we  slewed  round.  I  hailed  two  Maltsors  by  a  hut, 
and  they  directed  me  to  the  quarters  of  the  Gruda 
tribe,  and  I  left  the  officer  to  shift  for  himself. 

Bv  now  I  had  learnt  that,  in  spite  of  all  I  had  done 
for  the  Montenegrins  in  past  years,  they  could  in  no 
way  be  reliedCon  for  any  help,  and  that  the  poor 


214         THE  STEUGGLE  FOE  SCUTAEI 

tribesmen  whom  I  had  aided  in  their  last  year's 
trouble  were  my  best  friends.  Gruda  was  quartered 
in  the  big  house  of  a  rich  Moslem.  Tring  Smailia  of 
Gruda,  an  Albanian  virgin,  a  sturdy,  thick- set  woman 
who  does  not  know  what  fear  is,  had  looted  at  Dechich 
a  long,  low,  grey  pony,  built  like  a  badger,  loaded  it 
high  with  coffee,  bread,  and  salt,  and  come  out  to 
cook  for  Gruda.  She  hailed  me  with  joy,  led  me  to 
a  room  full  of  hay,  weapons,  and  old  mutton-bones, 
and  gave  me  a  handful  of  figs  and  a  lump  of  hot  duck, 
which  she  fished  out  of  a  petroleum-can  on  the  fire — 
the  first  meal  I  had  that  day.  I  went  out,  and  up  a 
hill  to  get  a  view.  A  frightful  firing  was  going  on. 
Some  Montenegrins  asked  me  what  had  become  of 
Plamenatz.     There  was  much  confusion. 

A  rumour  spread  that  the  Montenegrin  troops  were 
too  few,  and  that  it  was  going  hard  with  them.  But 
I  was  very  tired,  so  lay  down  in  some  hay  and  tried 
to  sleep.  But  the  next  house  caught  fire;  a  Maltsor 
had  let  a  cigarette  fall  on  the  hay-covered  floor. 
There  was  the  hell  of  a  row,  and  a  sauve  qui  pent. 
The  scattered  cartridges  left  behind  went  off  in  a 
great  fusillade.  Sleep  was  impossible,  so  I  took  the 
Houyhnhnm  for  a  walk  to  graze.  Heavy  firing  con- 
tinued. Shells  began  to  fall  beyond  our  house,  but 
at  a  safe  distance.  I  returned  to  it.  As  there  was 
no  other  food,  seven  sheep  were  slaughtered  and  set 
a-roasting  for  the  return  of  the  tribe  at  night.  All 
the  outer  wooden  staircase  and  the  balcony  streamed 
with  their  blood,  and  the  yard  was  strewn  with 
paunches  and  entrails. 

At  5.30  the  tribe  came  home,  weary  but  jubilant, 
the  bairaktar,  carrying  the  tribal  colours,  singing  and 


WAR  215 

yelling.  They  had  had  a  hard  fight.  Only  one 
Griida  man  was  killed.  They  had  killed  a  lot  of 
Turks  and  taken  their  Mausers.  "  As  for  the  Monte- 
negrins ?  Oh  yes,  a  lot  of  them  are  dead;  but  look 
at  the  rifles  and  cartridge  belts  we've  captured  !" 
They  flung  themselves  down  in  the  hay  like  couchant 
wolves. 

Old  Sokol  Batzi  and  Nikola  turned  up.  The  latter 
and  Plamenatz  had  lost  their  way  altogether.  The 
idea  of  following  the  military  wire  had  not  occurred 
to  the  brilliant  brain  of  the  Minister  of  the  Interior, 
and  he  had  wandered  right  down  to  Ura  Mesit  (the 
bridge),  and  been  turned  back  by  the  troops. 

The  room  at  night  was  an  indescribable  scene  of 
hot  food  and  filth.  The  hungry  men,  their  feet  and 
trousers  all  bloody  from  the  field  and  the  sheep's 
blood  on  the  stairs,  tore  the  lumps  of  hot  meat  as 
fast  as  Tring  cast  it  before  us,  but  with  fine  courtesy 
chucked  all  that  they  considered  tit-bits — the  lumps 
of  hot  fat  and  the  kidneys — at  me.  The  floor  was 
thick  with  bones,  bits,  and  muck;  the  house — a  fine 
one,  as  peasant  houses  go — was  befouled  and  \\Tecked. 
Two  gaudy  hanging-lamps,  of  Austrian  manufacture, 
and  a  woman's  folding  looking-glass,  which  in  such  a 
place  must  have  been  a  dear  treasure,  were  piteous 
relics  of  former  splendour.  Nikola,  disgusted,  said  to 
me:  "  We  are  supposed  to  be  liberating  Albania,  and 
we  are  living  like  wild  beasts  and  brigands  !  It  is 
sickening  !"'  The  red  light  of  the  still  blazing  house 
shone  in  on  us.  The  Maltsors  gorged  the  fat  mutton. 
Triumphant  savagery  and  childish  joy  mingled  with 
blood  and  filth. 

A  Montenegrin  brought  in  w()rd  that  Golema  was 


216        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

not  taken;  that  ten  battalions  had  been  engaged,  and 
had  lost  heavily.  There  was  no  aid  at  all  for  the 
wounded.  A  hundred  came  in.  Dom  Ernesto,  always 
provident,  had  brought  a  little  "  first-aid  "  material, 
but  used  it  all  on  the  first  ten.  A  tribesman  was  shot 
through  the  abdomen,  and  died.  It  was  impossible 
without  material  to  help  any  of  them. 

Wednesday,  October  30. — At  7  a.m.  a  hot  fire  started ; 
a  big  battle  was  raging  about  an  hour  away.  The 
Montenegrins  were,  in  fact,  trying  to  take  the  hill  of 
Bardhanjolt,  which  was  not  yet  fortified  in  any  way. 
I  decided  to  get  as  near  as  I  could,  but  was  told  I 
must  go  on  foot,  as  on  the  Houyhnhnm  my  head 
would  be  visible  above  the  hedges  and  draw  fire.  I 
met  some  soldiers  bringing  in  two  prisoners,  who 
reported  that  yesterday  had  cost  dear.  Later  I 
learnt  that,  out  of  two  battalions,  one  had  had  to  be 
made.  I  went  on  alone,  and  came  out  on  the  banks 
of  the  Kiri  River,  and  saw  with  a  sudden  pang  the 
big  stone  bridge,  Ura  Mesit,  which  I  had  known  in 
so  many  happy  moments.  The  shells  were  humming 
by,  and  a  piece  of  the  parapet  had  been  carried  away. 
Again  it  all  seemed  like  a  bad  dream.'  I  crossed  the 
bridge  carefully  and  slowly,  for  it  was  steep  and 
slippery,  and  was  scarcely  over  when  a  shell  whizzed 
behind  me,  just  cleared  the  bridge,  and  fell  into  the 
water  with  a  mighty  splash. 

I  turned  to  the  track,  which  was  under  cover  of 
rocks,  and  two  more  shells  passed  over  me,  one  falling 
just  beyond  the  bridge.  A  lot  of  Maltsors,  mostly 
women,  came  hurrying  along  loaded  up  with  tobacco 
and  household  gear,  and  prayed  me  to  turn  back. 
An  under-officer  came  up  and  asked  me  if  I  "  had 


WAR  217 

seen  Brigadier  Bechir,  and  where  was  Prince  Mirko," 
but  I  could  not  help  him.  More  and  more  shells 
screamed  over  or  near  us.  Retreating  people  told 
me  to  go  back.  Three  retreating  ^lontenegrin  soldiers 
said  advance  that  way  was  impossible,  as  the  Turks 
were  shelling  the  turn  of  the  path  heavily.  No  one 
could  get  round.  They,  too,  wanted  to  know  the 
w^hereabouts  of  the  Brigadier.  Things  were  going 
badly,  and  he  was  not  to  be  found.  As  there  was  no 
object  in  being  shot  at  this  stage  of  the  war  I,  too, 
turned  back,  and  on  reaching  the  bridge  saw  that 
the  Turks  must  be  trying  to  destroy  it,  as  the  shells 
came  pretty  quick,  but  all  too  high.  They  were 
striking  and  exploding  on  the  hillside  just  above. 

I  waited  in  cover  till  just  as  a  shell  had  fallen,  and 
then  again  crossed  the  bridge  with  great  deliberation, 
lest  I  should  slip  and  fall,  and  got  across  before  the 
next  shot  came.  My  ruling  idea,  now  I  was  near 
water,  was  to  wash,  for  I  had  not  even  washed  my 
hands  and  face  for  some  days,  except  in  a  little 
scooped-up  rain-water;  so  I  crawled  dow^n  to  the 
brink,  using  the  big  stone  buttress  of  the  bridge  as 
cover,  and  was  getting  my  head  and  face  and  neck 
washed,  when  another  shell  came,  and  some  soldiers 
yelled  to  me  to  come  up.  They  were  behind  a  rock 
at  the  top  with  a  long  deal  box.  When  I  had  washed 
as  much  as  I  could  in  the  presence  of  soldiers,  I  climbed 
up  to  them.  They  had  Prince  Mirko's  large  telescope 
in  the  box,  asked  me  where  he  was,  and  where  was 
Bechir,  and  were  obviously  reluctant  to  cross  the 
bridge.  Judging  by  the  hot  and  hotter  fire  that  was 
going  on,  I  felt  quite  certain  that  Master  Mirko  would 
not  be  found  out  there,  and  advised  them  not  to  go — 


218        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

and  risk  the  telescope.  Of  Bechir's  whereabouts  I 
knew  nothing. 

They  seemed  greatly  relieved,  and,  being  safe  under 
cover,  detailed  yesterday's  events.  The  Nikshitch 
battalion  had  been  very  badly  cut  up.  The  Captain 
ignorant] y  mistook  a  lot  of  Scutarene  Mohammedans 
for  Maltsori,  and  went  straight  into  their  hands,  and, 
as  ignorance  is  the  costliest  thing  in  the  world,  paid 
for  it  with  his  life.  The  Moslems  hacked  him  to  pieces, 
and  the  Montenegrins  retorted  by  mutilating,  and 
sixteen  noses  and  some  other  bits  were  taken  that 
night  to  the  Commandant.  I  said  good-bye  to  these 
amiable  youths  and  went  back  to  my  quarters,  which, 
with  much  sheep-slaying,  were  a  hell  of  blood  and 
muck. 

For  the  past  few  days  the  Maltsors  had  been  grum- 
bling and  growing  bitter.  They  had  invited  the  aid 
of  the  Montenegrins,  and  were  rapidly  discovering 
that  Montenegro  considered  them  as  conquered  rather 
than  as  allies.  They  had  expected  the  Albanian  flag 
to  be  hoisted  at  Tuzi,  and  declared  they  had  not  shed 
their  blood  so  many  times  on  Dechich  in  order  to  give 
it  to  Montenegro.  Also,  that  the  Montenegrins  com- 
mandeered and  looted  everything,  and  did  not  give 
them  the  promised  bread  rations  nor  shoes,  and  so 
forth.  There  was  much  friction.  That  afternoon  a 
large  number  of  Maltsors  left,  taking  with  them  such 
tobacco,  wool,  and  hides  as  they  had  looted,  and  also 
the  two  lamps  from  the  house  and  the  looking-glass. 
To  my  remonstrances  they  replied  that  if  they  did 
not  take  them  the  Montenegrins  would,  which  was 
true. 

At  about  four  the  firing,  which  had  never  quite 


WAR  219 

ceased,  became  very  violent  —  a  death-rattle  of 
machine-guns  and  rifles.  I  climbed  a  little  hill  with 
Padre  Sebastian,  and  the  firing  grew  nearer  and 
nearer.  The  Padre  remarked  grimly  that  both  he 
and  I  would  have  short  shrift  if  the  Turks  rushed  the 
village.  A  number  of  Maltsors  joined  us,  who,  dis- 
contented, had  not  gone  to  battle.  From  higher  up 
we  could  see  the  shells  falling  thick  up  the  valley 
just  beyond  the  bridge.  As  Sebastian  remarked, 
"  They  might  come  our  way  any  minute,"  and  we 
were  within  range.  But  they  appeared  to  be  aimed 
at  the  bridge,  though  they  never  hit  it.  It  was  a 
small  object,  and  invisible  from  the  position  of  the 
gunners. 

As  it  grew  dark  the  firing  died  down.  Dom 
Ernesto  came,  in  great  distress.  The  wounded  were 
coming  in,  and  he  had  never  a  rag  nor  bandage  left. 
Had  begged  Plamenatz,  who  replied  he  had  no  time 
to  bother  about  such  things.  Ernesto  begged  me  to 
ride  back  next  morning  and  look  for  the  Red  Cross, 
and  bring  as  much  a^  I  could  persuade  them  to 
give. 

The  sun-set  blazed  orange,  and  all  the  foreground 
was  aglow  with  ruddy  fires,  at  which  roasted  seven 
sheep  spitted  lengthwise.  The  smoke  rose  blue,  and 
the  smell  of  roast  mutton  mingled  with  the  sickly 
stench  of  sour  cud  from  the  sheep's  paunches  on  the 
ground. 

I  took  the  Houyhnhnm  to  water  at  a  muddy 
pond,  and  led  him  along  the  lane  to  graze,  and  when 
I  tied  him  up  in  the  dark  stable  for  the  night  buried 
my  face  on  his  warm,  clean-smelling  neck,  and  felt  he 
was  the  one  civilized  being  among  all  the  lot  of  us. 


220        THE  STEUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

Should  I  saddle  him  ?  If  the  Turks  but  knew  the 
confusion  of  the  Montenegrin  camp,  they  could  rush 
the  place  at  night  and  wipe  all  out  who  were  unable 
to  fly.  The  other  horses  were  all  unsaddled.  I 
decided  the  English  one  could  not  be  the  only  one 
to  look  afraid,  and  climbed  up  to  the  room  above. 
Tring  had  found  two  cabbages — an  amazing  relief. 
Our  sole  diet — the  greasy,  roasted  carcasses,  with 
their  blood  wet  on  our  boots — was  hard  to  tackle. 

Gjelosh  Djoko,  lean  and  haggard,  but  fit,  turned 
up  and  reported  that  Italy  had  made  peace  with 
Turkey,  to  the  disgust  of  our  whole  company.    Yanko 
was  said  to  have  taken  Ipek;  Dom  Ernesto  said  that 
the  Montenegrins  had  lost  heavily  to-day ;  and  some- 
one from  the  battlefield  had  seen  the  naked  corpse  of 
a  Moslem,  bound  hand  and  foot  with  cords,  and  with 
every  appearance  of  having  been  tortured  to  death. 
AVe  finished  the  meal.     I,  dog-tired,  lay  down  to  sleep 
with  my  saddle  under  my  head ;  but  in  came  a  lot  of 
Skreli  men,  who  started  howling   a  long  war-song 
about  the  fights  with  Tourgoud  last  year.     Our  men 
joined  in.     The  room  was  packed  to  suffocation  with 
a  yelling  mob.     Tired  out,  the  whole  crew  at  last  lay 
down  to   sleep,   and  I   was  sleeping  heavily  when 
Nikola  Batzi  suddenly  seized  my  shoulder,  shook  me, 
and  cried  in  my  ear:  "  Get  ready.     The  Turks  are  on 
us.     The  orders  are  to  leave  at  once."     I  sat  up.     A 
Montenegrin  was  shouting  something  in  the  doorway. 
Everyone  was  on  his  feet.     The  one  and  only  idea 
that  occurred  to  me  was  that  it  meant  flight  over 
rocks,  and  I  must  lace  my  boots  tight.     And  I  did  so 
very  carefully,  rolled  the  sleeping  sack,  picked  up  my 
saddle  and  bridle,  and  descended  in  a  crowd  to  the 


WAR  221 

pitch-dark  stable  underneath,  dropping  my  i^addlc- 
cloth  on  the  way. 

Groping  with  outstretched  hand,  I  felt  the 
Houyhnhnm's  hind  -  quarters,  followed  along  the 
halter,  untied  it,  took  it  in  my  teeth,  and  was  leading 
him  out,  when  in  came  Padre  Buonaventura  and 
struck  two  matches,  and  set  all  the  stableful  plunging. 
My  beast,  however,  followed  quietly,  and  stood  while 
I  saddled  him  in  the  light  of  the  full  moon.  The 
Maltsors,  with  the  skill  of  long  practice,  had  all  their 
beasts  loaded  up  in  no  time,  forgetting  nothing,  not 
even  the  remains  of  the  mutton,  and  in  very  few 
minutes  from  the  first  alarm  we  were  started.  Old 
Sokol  on  his  bay  horse  led,  and  we  rode  over  the 
rocks  to  the  houses  on  top  of  the  little  hill — the  Stafi 
Headquarters.  Here  was  a  nice  confusion:  men 
running  here,  there,  and  everywhere,  asking  for  their 
battalions,  their  officers,  for  the  Brigadier  and  God 
knows  what,  and,  as  it  was  one  in  the  morning  and 
bitterly  cold,  lighting  a  huge  fire — a  most  idiotic  pro- 
ceeding unless  they  wished  to  show  the  enemy  exactly 
where  we  were. 

Down  below  all  the  houses  we  had  left  were  ablaze ; 
the  Maltsors  and  the  Montenegrins  had  fired  them 
before  leaving.  The  chill  mist  of  the  night  glowed 
scarlet  under  the  cold  green  moonlight,  and  all  the 
distance  was  a  dark,  mysterious  purple-black,  a-rattle 
with  rifle-fire.     It  was  incomparably  magnificent. 

I  saw  the  long  line  of  ammunition  horses  eating 
hay,  so  slipped  oft'  and  began  feeding  the 
Houyhnhnm,  as,  if  it  came  to  a  sauve  qui  pent,  I 
had  only  him  to  rely  on,  and  there  was  no  knowing 
when  he  would  get  his  next  meal. 


222         THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

We  were  to  wait  for  orders — that  is,  we  had  to  wait 

till  Plamenatz  and  Prince  Mirko  and  staff  were  safely 

off,  and  then  cover  their  retreat.     I  saw  them  sneak 

by,  a  little  party  of  men  all  mounted,  and  at  1.30 

we  mounted  and  followed.     I  stuck  close  to  old  Sokol. 

No  one  was  sure  of  the  way,  for  it  was  decided  to  go 

straight  over  the  mountains,  lest,  by  the  trail  on  the 

plains,  we  should  be  rounded  up  by  the  enemy.     My 

little  horse  clambered  gallantly  over  rocks  I  should 

not  have  dared  ride  by  daylight.     I  kept  thinking, 

"  This  is  ridiculously  like  a  Book  for   Boys,"  and 

began  to  sing.     We  were  a  long,  long  trail  of  soldiers 

(a  mixed  assortment,  it  seemed,  from  a  variety  of 

battalions)    and   Maltsors.     Once   we   plunged   into 

thick  mist  in  a  valley  full  of  camp-fires,  and  seemed 

to  be  descending  into  hell.     And  soldiers  joined  us 

out  of  the  fog.     At  five  we  reached  a  half-burnt  house, 

and  my  party  of  Gruda  men  called  a  halt.     One  came 

up  and  restored  my  lost  saddle-cloth.     I  covered  my 

good  little  beast  and  picketed  him  behind  a  wall,  and 

when  I  got  in  found  that  all  the  others  were  crowded 

round  a  fire,  and  there  was  no  room  for  me.     At 

seven  the  chill  dawn  broke.     The  peaks  of  the  high 

mountains  showed  above  a  sea  of  white  mist,  with 

black  smoke  of  the  burnt  houses  hanging  over  it  in 

sluggish  lumps.     We  descended  a  very  steep  gully 

on  foot,  dragging  our  horses.     I  tumbled  underneath 

mine,  and  a  Maltsor  kindly  took  him  in  tow.     So  w^e, 

in  time,  arrived  back  again  at  Gruemir,  found  an 

empty  house,  and  I  crowded  into  it  with  a  lot  of  the 

Gruda.     The   indefatigable   Tring   unslung   the   old 

petroleum  can  from  her  badger-shaped  horse,  and  set 

to  work  to  boil  the  half-sheep  that  had  been  brought 


WAR  223 

along.  I  rubbed  down  the  Houyhnhnm  with  a  hand- 
ful of  hay,  gave  him  a  heap  from  a  handy  haystack, 
and  then  laid  flat  on  the  ground  to  rake  maize  out  of 
an  already  looted  maize-store  both  for  him  and  for 
myself.  I  did  not  think  ever  to  sink  so  low  as  to 
steal  hay  and  corn,  and  made  a  vow,  and  kept  it,  to 
go  back  after  the  war  and  pay  the  owners.  The 
Maltsors  were  very  kind,  and  took  my  horse  and 
stabled  him. 

Had  the  Turks  followed  us  up  last  night,  they  could 
have  finished  us  and  gone  through  to  Podgoritza, 
probably.  They  did  not,  and  so  gave  the  Monte- 
negrins time  to  replace  the  battalions  which  had 
retired,  by  some  of  better  stuff.  There  was  sharp 
fighting  all  day,  and  heavy  firing  on  Tarabosh.  It 
was  touch  and  go  whether  we  should  again  retire. 
I  went  out  alone  to  see  if  I  could  get  any  news,  and 
was  sprung  on  by  two  Montenegrin  soldiers,  who  said 
they  were  the  guard,  and  had  orders  to  arrest  all 
strangers.  But  three  or  four  Maltsors  came  leaping 
over  the  bushes,  shouting,  "  She  is  ours;  she  is  the 
Englishwoman  of  the  Kochaks  (insurgents)  "';  and 
the  guards,  recognizing  me  by  that  title,  laughed, 
**  All  right,''  and  told  gaily  that  they  shot  all  they 
arrested — had  shot  a  Scutarene  the  other  day.  He 
had  asked  to  see  Sokol  Batzi,  and  said  he  had  a 
message  for  him.  "  But  we  had  no  time,  so  we  shot 
him."  "  Perhaps  he  knew  Sokol  ?''  said  I.  "  Ne 
mari  "  (No  matter),  said  they.  And,  as  T  learnt  later, 
all  they  did  not  shoot  they  imprisoned  at  Podgoritza, 
sometimes  heavily  ironed,  without  any  trial. 

I  wandered  round  talking  to  stray  soldiers.  Many 
were  barefoot;  all  complained  of  the  "  inteudanz." 


224        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

They  were  furious  with  Bechir,  too — blamed  him  for 
the  heavy  losses  of  the  two  previous  days;  he  knew 
nothing.  They  swore  he  would  be  degraded  in  rank 
as  punishment.  "  We  expected  to  go  straight  to 
Scutari."  Were  amazed  and  dismayed  to  find  the 
plain  fortified.  I  said  I  knew  it  was.  "  Our  officers 
know  nothing,"  they  said;  "it  is  no  use  attacking 
Scutari  with  them.  We  must  wait  till  the  Serb 
officers  come."  Thus  the  men.  And  but  a  few  wrecks 
ago  these  officers  had  described  the  Serbs  to  me  as 
'*  swineherds."  The  men  seemed  so  demoralized  I 
could  not  believe  they  would  ever  storm  Scutari; 
and  I  did  not  then  imagine  the  Serbs  would  come,  as 
I  believed  their  objective  was  the  ^Egean.  If  Scutari 
could  stand  bombarding,  all  would  depend  on  her 
food-supply  to  hold  out  till  peace  were  made. 

Fighting  was  audible  all  day.  By  night  came  news 
that  the  Turkish  advance  was  checked;  also  that  a 
steamer  had  arrived  on  the  lake  with  a  bread  ration 
for  the  army.  Tring's  badger-horse  was  sent  to  fetch 
some  for  us.  The  soldiers  that  marched  by  that  night 
looked  comic,  each  with  a  loaf  impaled  on  his  bayonet. 

We  all  discussed  the  situation.  -One  thing  I  was 
resolved  upon,  and  that  was  to  go  back  to  Padre 
Lorenzo's  and  get  my  saddle-bags.  They  had  been 
locked  up  there  while  he  was  out  with  us,  and  I  had 
not  had  my  clothes  off  nor  seen  a  hair-brush  for  over 
a  fortnight. 

The  next  question  was  whether  there  would  be 
anything  more  of  interest  to  see.  It  was  abundantly 
clear  that  the  Montenegrins  could  not  get  anywhere 
near  Scutari  till  they  had  strong  reinforcements — if 
then.     The  Maltsors  were  all  sore  and  sick  at  the  way 


WAR  225 

they  were  being  treated,  and  already  asking  what 
was  to  be  the  end.  *'  It  won't  be  the  Turk  any  more ; 
that  is  certain,''  said  a  Franciscan  to  me.  "  But 
what  the  tribes  have  fought  for  is  freedom." 

The  tribes  were  in  favour  of  returning  to  their 
homes,  and  did  so  in  detachments;  and  on  Novem- 
ber 2,  with  some  of  them,  I  rode  back  to  the  church 
house  at  Baitza. 

Turning  a  corner,  we  heard  ear-piercing  screeches, 
as  though  all  the  cats  of  a  town  were  making  a  night 
of  it.  Five  Montenegrin  women  were  trying  by  force 
to  steal  a  horse  from  three  Catholic  Kastrati  women. 
The  Montenegrins  had  him  by  the  tail,  and  clasped 
his  hind-legs,  and  vainly  strove  to  drag  them  back. 
The  little  beast,  with  straddled  feet  firmly  planted, 
resisted  stubbornly.  The  Albanian  women  held  him 
by  mane  and  neck,  remonstrating  at  the  tops  of  their 
voices.  Up  came  an  Albanian  man,  who  laid  his 
hand  on  the  horse's  head;  and  the  animal,  recognizing 
his  master,  followed  so  promptly  that  the  Monte- 
negrin women  had  no  time  to  resist.  They  were  left 
lamenting,  or  rather  cursing,  loudly,  while  I  and  my 
men,  roaring  with  laughter,  followed  the  horse  and  his 
rightful  owners.  These  explained  that,  though  they 
had  acted  as  allies  of  the  Montenegrins,  nothing  was 
safe  from  these  harpy  women.  One  Catholic  woman, 
sister  of  a  man  I  knew  well,  told  that,  when  in  her 
hou.se  alone,  a  party  of  Montenegrin  women  rushed 
in  on  her.  Three  hold  her  down  and  by  the  throat, 
while  the  others  plundered  her  clothes-chest  of  every- 
thing. 

Thev  were  ready  to  tramp  any  distance  for  loot. 
As  a  Bosnian  volunteer  said  to  me  later:  '"  A  Mnnte- 

10 


226         THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

negrin  woman  will  march  100  kilos  to  steal  one  shirt." 
They  went  out  with  little  bundles,  ostensibly  to  carry 
food  to  the  soldiers,  and  returned  with  at  least  double 
the  amount  of  plunder,  no  matter  how  valueless.  A 
girl,  come  all  the  way  from  Nikshitch,  was  tramping 
back  with  a  bundle  of  tobacco,  a  huge  iron  chain, 
three  pots,  and  a  coffee-mill. 

Nor  was  all  looting  effected  without  bloodshed.  A 
man  who  was  with  the  Montenegrins  told  me  vividly 
later  how  he  had  seen  them  enter  a  small  Moslem 
house  not  far  from  Tuzi.  An  old  man  was  crouched 
by  the  fire,  with  several  women.  None  showed  any 
fear,  for  they  were  all  harmless  non-combatants.  A 
soldier  with  one  blow  cut  off  the  old  man's  head. 
They  all  fell  on  the  screaming  women  and  tore  their 
ornaments  from  them.  One  had  a  necklace  which 
the  robbers  thought  was  gold ;  they  tried  to  snatch  it 
from  the  man  who  had  taken  it,  fought  each  other, 
and  finally  broke  the  poor  little  ornament  to  pieces, 
each  man  grabbing  what  he  could,  while  the  old  man's 
spouting  blood  hissed  in  the  fire.  Such  are  the 
glories  of  war. 

I  rode  on  to  the  Franciscan's,  revelled  in  a  change 
of  clothes,  and  discussed  the  chances  of  war  with  him 
all  the  evening.  We  decided  that  so  long  as  food  held 
out  there  was  no  likelihood  that  Scutari  would  sur- 
render. Unless  strong  reinforcements  came,  no  im- 
mediate developments  were  to  be  expected.  It  was 
better,  therefore,  for  me  to  return  to  Podgoritza,  and 
learn  what  the  other  Balkan  States  were  doing. 


CHAPTER  XIII 

THE   GLORIES    OF   WAR 

The  ^laltsors  next  morning  escorted  me  over  the 
Chafa  Kishat  and  then  the  Houyhnhnm  and  I  pushed 
on  to  Podgoritza,  after  a  determined  effort  on  his 
part  to  go  either  to  his  old  home,  the  hospital  at  Tuzi, 
or  to  the  burnt  Turkish  kula  on  the  frontier.  It  was 
the  evening  of  November  3  when  we  plodded  wearily 
into  the  town.  Four,  or  at  most  six  weeks,  it  had 
been  anticipated  would  see  the  end  of  the  war  and 
Montenegro  victorious.  Almost  a  month  had  now 
passed  and  the  end  seemed  no  nearer.  Podgoritza 
no  longer  talked  of  showing  Servia  and  the  world  in 
general  how  a  war  should  be  conducted. 

Yanko  Vukotitch  had  taken  Bijelopoljeon  October  12 
and  Berani  on  the  16th,  and  Vesho\dtch  had  taken 
Plava  and  Gusinje.  He  had  carried  out  his  plan, 
had  blown  up  the  Turkish  border  kula,  and  at  once 
fallen  unexpectedly  on  the  frontier  Moslem  villages. 
The  two  small  towns,  having  no  military  organization 
and  very  little  ammunition,  surrendered  almost  at 
once,  though  they  were  almost  solid  Moslem  as  to 
population.  (Plava  contained  but  fifteen  Christian 
houses  and  Gusinje  forty.)  It  was  a  case  of  armed 
peasants  each  trying  to  defend  his  own,  and  against 
regulars  these  have  rarely  a  chance. 

227 


228        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

But  the  scheme  of  the  three  divisions  of  the  Monte- 
negrin army  meeting  at  Prizren  had  already  passed 
into  the  Never-never  Land,  along  with  King  Nikola's 
dream  of  sitting  there  upon  the  throne  of  Stefan  Du- 
shan ;  for  the  Serbs,  to  the  surprise  of  Montenegro  and 
of  larger  and  wiser  lands  too,  arrived  at  Prizren  first, 
and  took  it.  Meanwhile,  the  armies  of  Prince  Danilo 
and  Mitar  Martinovitch  had  done  practically  nothing 
towards  taking  Scutari;  they  had  shown  only  that 
they  could  not  rush  it.  If  it  were  to  be  stormed,  it 
should  have  been  done  at  once,  without  giving  the 
town  time  to  fortify  itself  yet  more  strongly.  It  was 
not  yet — for  lack  of  troops — effectually  besieged. 
The  route  to  Medua  was  still  open. 

The  knowledge  of  the  Montenegrin  officers  was  so 
wanting  that,  though,  just  after  I  left,  they  succeeded 
not  only  in  regaining  the  ground  they  had  lost,  but 
actually  in  occupying  Bardhanjolt  Hill,  they  failed 
to  recognize  that  it  w^as  one  of  the  keys  of  Scutari. 
When  the  heavy  autumn  rains  set  in  a  few  days  later, 
they  retired  from  it  to  seek  a  more  sheltered  spot. 
Hussein  Riza  promptly  reoccupied  it,  and  swiftly 
and  skilfully  made  it  a  stronghold  which  played  an 
important  part  in  the  saving  of  Scutari;  but  this  is 
anticipating. 

About  Martinovitch's  army,  all  that  the  Montene- 
grins could  tell  me  was  that  it  had  burnt  a  number 
of  Albanian  villages  across  the  frontier,  but  had  had 
no  effect  on  Tarabosh  as  yet. 

The  King,  afraid  of  the  heavy  resultant  death-rolls, 
gave  orders  that  no  more  attempts  at  storming  were 
to  be  made  till  the  arrival  of  reinforcements.  Rain 
fell  in  torrents,  and  the  army  of  Prince  Danilo  settled 


WAR  229 

down  to  entrench  itself  in  mud  and  water.  Con- 
stantinople, it  was  said,  was  about  to  fall,  and  we 
were  told  that  Prince  Danilo  was  preparing  to  start 
in  order  to  take  part  in  the  triumphal  entry  which  all 
the  Crown  Princes  of  the  Balkans  were  to  make  to- 
gether. It  was  anticipated  that  Europe  would  order 
peace  so  soon  as  Constantinople  fell,  and  the  allies 
would  then  share  the  peninsula  between  them.  Several 
people  expressed  to  me  the  belief  that  there  would  be 
little  more  fighting. 

So  much  for  the  political  situation.  In  Podgoritza 
the  notable  facts  were,  that  the  Italian  and  Austrian 
military  Red  Crosses  had  arrived  and  installed  them- 
selves. The  Italians  had  transformed  the  Italian 
Monopol  tobacco  factory  into  an  excellent  hospital, 
bringing  not  only  bedsteads,  bedding,  and  clothing, 
but  all  necessaries  for  an  operating-room  and  also 
X-ray  apparatus,  kitchen  necessaries,  and  a  large 
store  of  wine  and  provisions.  As  most  of  the  stafi 
had  been  in  Tripoli  or  seen  service  in  one  of  the  many 
earthquake  catastrophes  in  Italy,  they  were  thoroughly 
practical,  and  I  cannot  speak  too  highly  of  their 
efficiency,  courtesy,  and  kindness.  I  was  indebted 
also  for  much  help  and  kindness  to  the  Austrian  Red 
Cross,  but  this  was  withdrawn  shortly,  for  Austria 
mobilized. 

The  most  startling  change  in  the  town  was  that 
D ,  the  recently  appointed  Governor  of  Podgo- 
ritza, had  been  arrested  and  marched  off  in  irons,  and 
that  Stanko  Markovitch,  of  sinister  fame,  was  once 
again  head  of  affairs.     Some  said  he  had  intrigued 

for  D 's  overthrow,  with  what  truth  I   do  not 

know. 


230        THE  STEUGGLE  FOE  SCUTAEI 

A  change  for  the  better  was  that  Zhivkovitch,  the 
Eeuter  agent,  had  left  Podgoritza,  so  that  it  was 
now  possible  to  get  off  telegrams  in  time.  I  found 
that  my  Ti7nes  telegram  of  the  taking  of  Tuzi  had 
been  held  back  twenty-four  hours  while  he  was  censor. 

Finding,  from  a  few  copies  that  had  turned  up, 
that  the  Daily  Chronicle  was  a  very  different  class  of 
paper  from  what  I  had  imagined,  I  threw  it  over, 
but  continued  to  work  for  the  Nation,  Manchester 
Guardian,  and,  occasionally.  The  Times. 

With  a  view  partly  to  getting  details  of  how  things 
were  going,  T  went  to  work  for  a  time  in  the  Montene- 
grin hospital.  The  wounded,  except  those  who  had 
the  luck  to  fall  into  Austrian  or  Italian  hands,  were 
crowded  into  three  of  the  four  barracks  that  formed 
the  Voyni  Stan.  The  fifth  block,  which  in  peace-time 
was  the  Commander's  headquarters,  served  as  depot 
for  the  Montenegrin  Eed  Cross,  and  contained  the 
stores,  kitchen,  and  operating  -  room.  Incredible 
though  it  may  sound,  these  barracks,  built  but  a  few 
years  ago  to  contain  600  men  or  more  at  a  pinch, 
have  no  kind  of  latrine  accommodation  and  no 
washing  arrangements  of  any  sort. 

A  Montenegrin  doctor  was  in  charge,  and  extremely 
jealous  of  all  foreign  aid  (especially  attempts  at  cleanli- 
ness), but  was  forced  to  accept  it,  as  Montenegro 
possessed  only  two  good  surgeons,  neither  of  whom 
was  at  Podgoritza,  and  scarcely  any  properly  trained 
assistants.  The  Montenegrin  ladies  were  all  of  too 
high  degree  to  do  such  dirty  work.  Briefly,  the  place 
was  a  filthy  hell.  The  floors  were  covered  with 
spittle  and  old  mutton-bones.  A  squawking  crowd 
of  dirty  girls  and  women — the  dregs  of  Podgoritza — 


WAR  231 

with  red  crosses  on  tlieir  amis,  flocked  to  steal  anything 
stealable.  With  prurient  giggles  they  pushed  and 
shoved  to  get  a  glimpse  of  any  wound  they  considered 
exciting,  and  made  dressing  difficult. 

When  meal-times  came,  they  stole  the  patients' 
food.  The  soup  came  up  mere  cold  water,  and  the 
meat  mostly  bones.  The  patients  flung  the  contents 
of  their  ration  cans  on  the  floor,  and  yelled  that  as 
the  King  had  commandeered  their  sheep,  they  had 
the  right  to  decent  food. 

The  patients'  relatives  came  to  share  their  meals, 
insisted  on  passing  the  night  in  the  hospital,  and  slept 
in  numbers  between  the  beds.  Referring  to  the 
moral  atmosphere,  Ognjenovitch,  the  head  of  the 
Montenegrin  Red  Cross,  suggested  playfully  it  should 
be  called  the  "  Red  Lamp."  Nor  would  I  myself 
wear  the  badge. 

The  air,  owing  to  this  unnecessary  crowd,  was  foul 
and  made  yet  fouler  by  the  fact  that  the  men,  wounded 
three  weeks  ago,  were  still  in  their  bloody  uniforms, 
and  in  some  cases  had  not  had  a  change  of  sliirt. 
Many  had  crooked  limbs,  as  their  unset  bones  had 
united  of  themselves,  and  not  one  wound  that  I 
saw  had  been  properly  cleaned  at  the  beginning;  but 
into  surgical  details  it  is  not  my  intention  to  enter. 

Heavy  rains  fell.  The  Rivers  Kiri,  Drin,  and  Bo- 
jana  flooded  wide,  and  the  Montenegrin  army  could 
neither  unite  around  Scutari  nor  approach  near  to  it. 
Martinovitch's  army,  in  spite  of  an  Austrian  protest 
that  Medua  must  belong  to  a  free  Albania,  occupied 
such  as  there  is  of  it  on  November  17,  and  prepared 
to  march  on  Alessio,  and,  to  the  intense  surprise  of 
many  of  us,  the  Serbs  arrived  over  Miidita.     They 


232         THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

attacked  Alessio  from  one  side,  while  Montenegio 
attacked  from  the  other.  It  surrendered,  and  was 
considered  by  the  Serbs  their  property.  They  had 
marked  out  Medua  as  theirs  also,  to  Montenegro's 
extreme  wrath,  and  there  was  much  friction  on  the 
subject. 

The  Serbs  had  come  down  from  Djakova,  which 
the  combined  Serb  and  Montenegrin  armies  had 
taken.  Except  at  Flet,  where  the  Moslem  peasants 
resisted  them  three  days  in  a  narrow  defile,  they 
passed  through  without  difficulty,  as  the  Mirdites 
were  so  short  of  ammunition  their  Abbot  persuaded 
them  that  to  fight  would  be  only  to  court  massacre. 
I  have  never  understood  why  the  fact  that  the  Servian 
army  traversed  the  mountains  was  written  up  as  a 
marvellous  exploit.  By  one  route  it  is  three  and  a 
half  days'  march,  if  you  do  it  slowly,  as  I  did,  and  by 
the  other  about  four.  A  comical  episode  was  that 
though  the  Servian  and  Montenegrin  officers  met 
after  dark,  a  certain  newspaper  published  a  photo- 
graph of  their  meeting.  They  were,  in  fact,  induced 
to  meet  again  next  day  for  the  purpose.  Such  is 
journalism. 

That  the  Serbs  would  come  Adriatic-wards  had 
never  entered  my  head,  nor  had  I  ever  heard  it  sug- 
gested, and  I  was  distressed  and  dismayed.  Their 
demand  for  Durazzo  as  a  port  was,  and  is,  outrageous. 
There  were  no  "  brother-Serbs  to  be  liberated  "  there, 
and  by  taking  the  Sanjak  and  uniting  the  Serbo- 
Montenegrin  frontiers,  they  had  obtained  access  to 
Antivari  and  Dulcigno,  both  far  better  ports  than 
Durazzo. 

It  was  rumoured  on  the  19th  that  the  King  was  in 


WAR  233 

Rijeka  offering  terms  of  surrender  to  some  envoys 
from  Scutari,  so  I  mounted  the  Houyhnhnm,  who 
was  eating  his  head  off,  and  we  set  out  to  get  news. 
Halfway  I  met  the  royal  motor-car  and  reined  him 
up  by  the  bank  lest  he,  quite  unused  to  such  things, 
should  take  fright.  Being  broken  to  artillery,  he, 
however,  showed  no  interest  in  it  at  all.  In  him,  on 
the  contrary,  their  Royal  Highnesses  were  extremely 
interested.  The  car  stopped,  and  out  they  all  jumped 
— the  Crown  Princess,  Princess  Joseph  Battenburg, 
Princess  Vera.  "  This,"  cried  one  of  the  Royal  ladies, 
"  is  your  celebrated  horse  !  We  have  heard  all  about 
it !"  "  Very  good  horse,  your  Royal  Highness," 
said  I.  "  I  bought  him  in  Tuzi."  "  What!"  cried 
she,  "you  bought  it?"  ''Twelve  pound  Turk, 
Madam."  "  Oh !"  she  cried,  deeply  disappointed, 
"  we  thought  you  took  it.  That  you  went  straight  to 
Tuzi  and  took  a  horse  from  the  Turks."  "  I  took 
nothing  at  Tuzi,  your  Royal  Highness,"  said  I.  I 
might  have  added,  "  I  was  the  only  one  that  did." 
But  Royal  personages  are  unaccustomed  to  the  chill 
truth. 

Scutari  would  not  listen  to  terms  of  surrender,  and 
the  Voyni  Stan  hospitals  were  all  cleared  out  hurriedly 
next  day.  Yanko  Vukotitch  had  arrived  with  10,000 
men  of  his  army.  With  these  reinforcements  it  was 
proposed  to  storm  Scutari,  and  a  rush  of  wounded 
might  result. 

The  Montenegrins  were  furious  at  the  failure  of 
pourparlers.  As  I  wrote  at  the  time:  "  Their  hatred 
and  ferocity  are  appalling.  They  do  not  even  care  if 
the  Moslem  children  are  starved;  they  declare  they 
are  going  to  stamp  out  the  whole  Moslem  population. 


234         THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

The  Maltsori  are  angry  at  the  Montenegrin  attitude, 
and  I  foresee  great  complications  in  the  future." 

The  Albanians  at  Avlona,  under  the  guidance  of 
Ismail  Kemal,  hoisted  the  Albanian  flag  on  Novem- 
ber 28,  and  declared  their  neutrality  and  independence. 
This  made  the  Montenegrins  angrier  than  ever.  The 
affair  of  the  Austrian  Consul,  Prochashka,  also  com- 
plicated matters.  The  Servian  commander  at  Prizren 
had  prevented  him  from  communicating  with  his 
Government,  and  all  sorts  of  tales  were  rife,  but  we 
had  as  yet  no  authentic  particulars.  The  Montene- 
grins expressed  a  hope  that  his  nose  had  been  cut  off, 
so  that  he  could  never  show  himself  in  Vienna  again, 
and  some  actually  believed  this  had  been  done. 

The  Serbs  offered  to  help  Montenegro  take  Scutari, 
and  their  offer  was  refused,  it  is  said,  rudely.  They 
were,  however,  allowed  to  help  blockade  the  town,  for 
the  Montenegrins  had  not  enough  men  to  surround  it 
efficiently. 

Meanwhile,  sick  men  came  pouring  in  from  Yanko 

Vukotitch's    army.     Dr.    K ,   a   young   Bosnian 

doctor,  well  trained  in  Vienna,  asked  me  to  help  him, 
for  most  of  the  foreign  Red  CrossBs  had  come  only 
for  the  fun  of  gunshot  wounds,  and  no  preparation 
of  any  kind  had  been  made  for  the  sick.  Yanko's 
campaign  had,  indeed,  not  been  much  more  than  a 
walk-over  if  the  report  of  Dr.  Ilitchkovitch,  the  mili- 
tary surgeon,  were  true,  that  they  had  only  lost  300 
killed.  But  now  they  were  falling  out  in  numbers 
with  enteric,  dysentery,  neuralgic  and  rheumatic  pains, 
and  acute  diarrhoea,  caused  by  exposure  and  bad  food. 

When  K and  I  went  to  their  rescue,  we  found 

that  the  Montenegrin   doctor   had   pitched  the   lot 


WAR  235 

together  in  one  filthy  building,  crowded  together  on 
the  floor  on  mattresses  that  oozed  dirty  rags.  A 
delirious  case  of  smallpox  howled  in  the  midst.  All 
had  been  classed  as  dysentery,  and  were  receiving  no 
nourishment  but  weak,  milkless  tea  and  opium. 

K took  over  the  fourth  house  of  the  Voyni 

Stan  for  the  sick,  and  he  and  his  wife  and  two  Catholic 
Sisters  and  I  strove  to  reduce  it  to  some  kind  of  de- 
cency and  order.  Some  of  the  men  stank  so  that  the 
Montenegrin  women,  who  were  supposed  to  be  look- 
ing after  them,  would  not  go  near  them,  and  they 
were  in  the  last  stages  of  misery  and  exhaustion. 
All  swarmed  with  lice,  and  the  beds  with  bugs.  The 
Red  Cross  kitchen  supplied  no  invalid  diet.  Milk 
was  all  adulterated  with  dirty  water. 

K got  Turkish  prisoners  to  do  the  cleaning. 

They  slept  in  the  attic,  and  were  thankful  to  be  under 
cover.  I  did  anything  that  needed  doing,  including 
clipping  lousy  heads  and  washing  lousy  bodies  with 
petroleum  out  of  the  lamps,  for  lack  of  any  other 
remedy.  Most  of  the  men  swarmed  with  them. 
Dressing  bed.sores,  too,  for  some  of  the  men  had  laid 
on  the  bare  earth  a  couple  of  weeks  before  being 
brought  to  us,  and  were  ulcerated  not  only  on  their 
backs,  but  in  some  cases  had  been  turned  over  after- 
wards on  their  faces  and  had  sores  on  thighs  and  ab- 
domen as  well.  I  cooked  whatever  invalid  diet  I 
could  invent,  with  milk  and  eggs  which  I  bought 
daily  in  the  bazar,  and  Quaker  oats  and  meat  ex- 
tract, which  the  Austrian  Red  Cross  gave  me.  All 
the  cooking  had  to  be  done  on  my  own  two  spirit 
lamps,  and  a.s  the  town  ran  out  of  methylated  spirit. 
1  burnt  the  camphor  spirit  which  was  served  out  for 


236        THE  STEUGGLE  FOE  SCUTAEI 

massage,  and  rubbed  tbe  rbeumatic  men  with  oil  of 
mustard  instead.  They  were  mostly  stone-cold  up 
to  the  knee  through  wading  in  snow. 

We  held  about  140  patients,  and  as  fast  as  any 
were  fit  they  were  replaced  by  others.  Incidentally 
I  learnt  a  lot  about  the  war,  for  I  had  a  great  number 
of  men  through  my  hands.  They  all  gloried  in  their 
bestiality,  and  related  in  detail  their  nose-cutting 
exploits,  imitated  the  impaling  of  a  Turk  upon  a 
bayonet,  and  the  slicing  off  of  his  nose  and  upper  lip, 
and  the  shouted  advice  to  the  still  living  man:  "  Go 
home  and  show  your  wives  how  pretty  you  are  !" 
All,  with  very  few  exceptions,  had  taken  noses.  An 
old  man  of  seventy  had  only  taken  two,  but  excused 
himself  on  the  grounds  of  having  fallen  ill  at  the 
beginning.  His  son,  with  the  Podgoritza  army,  had, 
he  said,  done  very  well  though,  and  so  would  he, 
God  willing,  so  soon  as  he  was  well. 

They  told,  too,  of  how  they  had  bayoneted  the 
wounded,  "  our  remedy  to  cure  Turks,"  and  of  how 
they  carried  all  the  human  fragments  they  had  sliced 
ofi  to  their  Commandant.  And  they  spoke  foully  of 
Turkish  women. 

All  the  men  who  were  not  too  ill  to  be  past  caring 
had  but  one  idea — to  be  well  in  time  for  the  looting 
and  slaying  in  Scutari.  A  young  Bosnian,  down  with 
enteric,  who  had  come  as  a  volunteer  to  help  "  his 
brother-Slavs,"  told,  with  disgust,  of  the  looting  of 
Djakova,  and  particularized  the  hideous  rapacity  of 
the  Montenegrin  women. 

Dr.  K ,  also  an  enthusiastic  Slav,  who  had  come 

to  help  at  his  own  expense,  was  sickened.  A  Eussian 
surgeon,  the  only  foreign  doctor  who  had  been  allowed 


WAR  237 

in  the  Kosovo  district,  came  to  work  with  us  for  a 
few  days,  and  corroborated  the  men's  statement  that 
they  had  scarcely  left  a  nose  on  a  corpse  between 
Berani  and  Ipek. 

Some  warm  partisans  of  Montenegro  have  declared 
that  they  do  not  see  anything  very  horrible  in  the 
mutilation  of  dead  bodies,  and  if  the  dead  alone  had 
been  mutilated,  we  might  dismiss  it  as  the  dirty  trick 
of  a  barbarous  people;  but  the  men's  own  account 
was  that  they  mutilated  the  wounded  before  giving 
them  a  final  bayonet  prod.  After  the  war  I  had  this 
corroborated  by  a  young  Moslem  from  Plava,  who 
came  down  to  Scutari  to  beg  surgical  help.  He  told 
that  he  and  some  dozen  comrades  were  all  shot  down 
in  fair  fight.  As  they  lay  bleeding  on  the  field  the 
Montenegrins  came  round  and  bayoneted  the  lot, 
who  all  succumbed  but  himself.  He  fainted.  Later 
he  came  to,  tried  to  rise,  and  by  so  doing,  poor  wretch, 
drew  the  attention  of  a  Montenegrin  officer  and  some 
men.  They  fell  on  him,  wounded  and  helpless, 
hacked  off  his  nose  and  upper  lip,  threw  him  down, 
and  gave  him  another  bayonet  stab,  and  left  him. 
Such  is  the  superb  vitality  of  these  people,  that  in 
the  night  he  revived  and  managed  to  crawl  to  shelter 
and  friends,  and  recovered.  Two  surgeons  examined 
him  in  my  presence  at  Scutari.  The  scars  and  the 
bayonet  stabs  attested  the  truth  of  his  story. 

Great  force  had  been  used  when  mutilating.  The 
nasal  bone  was  hacked  right  through  between  the 
eyes,  and  the  whole  of  the  upper  lip  sliced  away  to 
the  corners  of  the  mouth.  The  cheeks  had  retracted, 
and  a  hideous  hole,  with  points  of  bone  sticking  up 
in  it,  yawned  in  his  face.     His  exposed  teeth  and 


238        THE  STEUGGLE  FOE  SCUTAEI 

gums  grinned  horribly,  and  for  want  of  an  upper  lip 
he  articulated  with  difficulty. 

Few,  it  is  scarcely  necessary  to  say,  survived  such 
treatment.  "  Lady,"  I  was  told,  "  there  were  very 
many — but  the  earth  covers  them." 

To    return   to    the    hospital.     The    two    Catholic 

Sisters  went  out  on  strike  and  Mrs.  K knocked  up, 

and  I  had  all  three  women's  work  as  well  as  my  own 
to  do  for  four  days,  and  we  had  about  140  patients. 

Having  promised  to  help  K ,  I  could  not  leave  him 

in  the  lurch,  but  I  had  it  more  and  more  upon  my 
conscience  that  by  curing  men  to  go  back  to  the  front 
I  was  not  only  prolonging  the  war,  but  aiding  and 
abetting  every  kind  of  atrocity,  and  that  I  ought  to 
cease  to  do  so. 

At  dinner  at  the  hotel  I,  with  the  exception  of  a 
Eussian  Sister  at  the  other  end  of  the  table,  was  the 
only  woman  among  a  pack  of  officers,  officials,  and 
Montenegrin  doctors,  and  these  discussed  and  joked 
over  the  hideous  doings.  I  had  hoped  and  believed 
that  the  Servian  army  was  more  civilized.  A  report 
had  come  to  me  that  an  Albanian  passing  through 
Podgoritza  had  declared  that,  in  Kosovo  vilayet  the 
ground  in  many  places  was  simply  strewn  with  the 
bodies  of  women  and  children,  that  he  had  seen  a 
living  foot  protruding  from  the  ground  and  waving 
feebly,  but  had  not  dared  to  stop,  as  a  Servian  officer 
was  wdth  him.  As  I  was  worked  almost  beyond  my 
strength  I  did  not,  I  regret  now,  see  this  witness  and 
examine  him,  nor,  in  fact,  attach  much  belief  to  the 
report  till  a  Servian  officer  turned  up  at  the  dinner- 
table,  and  related,  with  glee,  the  valorous  deeds  of 
the  Serbs.     "  We  have,"  he  boasted,   "  annihilated 


WAR  239 

the  Ljuma  tribe."  He  described  wholesale  slaughter 
of  men,  women,  and  children,  and  the  burning  of  the 
villages.  The  Montenegrins  chuckled  as  they  gobbled 
their  dinners.  ''  Why  did  you  do  this  ?"  I  asked  at 
last.  "  When  I  was  there  the  people  received  me  very 
well." 

There  was  a  shout  of  laughter.  ''  Go  there  now 
and  look  for  your  dear  friends.  You  won't  find  a 
single  one.  They  shot  one  of  our  telegraphists  and 
we  sent  enough  battalions  to  destroy  them."  The 
Moslem  problem  was  to  be  "  simplified."  "  When 
the  land  is  once  ours,"  I  was  repeatedly  assured, 
"  there  will  be  no  Moslem  problem." 

Of  the  Ljuma  tribe  very  few  survived.  The  de- 
struction of  the  whole  Albanian  race  was  the  avowed 
intention  of  both  Serb  and  Montenegrin.  The  com- 
pany at  the  dinner-table  varied  from  week  to  week; 
but  on  this  point  was  always  agreed. 

Meanwhile  the  Montenegrins  had  not  dared  another 
assault,  but  the  armistice  declared  at  the  beginning 
of  December  at  Tchatalja,  was  not  observed,  for 
Hussein  Riza  had  refused  to  accept  a  letter  ^^Titten 
by  the  German  Minister  at  Cettigne,  and  conveyed 
by  Montenegrin  hands,  as  orders  which  he  could  obey. 

When  the  icy  "  bora,"  that  raged  and  shrieked  and 
broke  the  hospital  windows,  dropped,  we  could  hear 
the  heavy  boom  of  guns  now  and  again.  Just  before 
Christmas  a  heartrending  letter  reached  me  from 
Padre  Camillo  of  Shoshi,  telling  me  that  the  Shoshi 
people  were  sheltering  the  unhappy  Moslems  burnt 
out  at  Drishti,  had  till  now  fed  them,  but  supplies 
were  running  short,  and  if  no  help  came  thev  must 
starve.     He    prayed    that    1    would    write    to    King 


240        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

Nikola  and  beg  him  to  have  pity  for  the  conquered, 
and  send  either  maize  or  money  to  help  them.  Maize 
could  still  be  bought  from  the  up-country  Christian 
tribes. 

I  copied  passages  of  the  letter  and  sent  them  to 
the  King,  without  result;  and,  not  to  waste  time,  I 
sent  up  some  money  at  once.  Later  I  sent  more, 
and  after  the  war  had  the  pleasure  of  being  thanked 
by  some  of  the  Drishti  men,  who  said  that  the  maize 
bought  for  them  by  the  Padre  had  saved  their  families. 
But  this  is  anticipating.  When  the  Montenegrins 
heard  what  I  had  done  they  were  furious,  but  this  I 
only  learnt  later.  They  had  hoped  that  all  their 
victims  would  starve. 

Just   before   Christmas  Dr.  K ,  his  wife,  and 

I  took  a  day  off  to  get  a  breath  of  fresh  air.  We 
were  all  three  very  tired.  They  drove;  I  rode  the 
Houyhnhnm.  At  Tuzi,  Gjurashkovitch,  the  newly 
appointed  Governor  of  Tuzi,  joined  us,  and  we  went 
across  the  plain  to  Nenhelm,  or  Hum,  as  the  Monte- 
negrins had  already  renamed  it.     Our  plan  was  to 

ascend  the  hill  to  get  a  view  of  Scutari,  as  the  K s 

had  never  seen  it.  From  the  hill-foot  at  the  water's 
edge  came  an  infuriated  caterwauling.  A  pack  of 
Montenegrin  women  had  been  forbidden  to  follow 
the  army.  For  some  weeks  past  there  had  been  tales 
of  theft.  The  Montenegrin  women,  having  looted 
everything  portable  from  the  enemy,  had  begun 
plundering  their  own  army.  The  women  of  one  tribe 
robbed  the  men  of  another,  stole  their  greatcoats, 
and  even  their  shoes,  while  they  were  asleep,  as  some 
told  me,  and  had  taken  a  whole  lot  of  army  revolvers. 
Now  that  they  were  no  longer  needed  to  transport 


WAR  241 

loot,  they  were  forbidden  to  come  to  camp  any  more. 
It  wsis  a  pretty  scene — the  yowling  pack  of  women, 
crazy  for  drink  and  the  excitement  of  the  camps, 
striving  to  force  a  way  on  to  the  ferry  barges,  and  the 
men  hounding  them  off  with  yells. 

We  climbed  the  hill,  saw  the  wrecked  fort  at  the 
top,  and  had  a  clear  view  of  poor  Scutari.  Gjurash- 
kovitch  spoke  with  glee  of  its  speedy  fall,  and,  point- 
ing around,  said:  "  What  a  lot  of  money  we  shall 
make  with  all  thi.^  fertile  land  !'  "  But  it  is  all 
private  property,  and  already  cultivated,"  I  said. 
I  had  not  realized  then  that  the  Montenegrins  meant 
to  expel  the  owners,  as  they  had  done  after  the  last 
war,  and  appropriate  their  property.  He  retorted 
angrily:  "  What  we  take  is  ours  to  do  as  we  like 
with."  I  stared  at  Scutari,  with  sick  fear  as  to  what 
would  be  the  fate  of  my  friends.  And  the  distant 
guns  boomed. 

Suddenly  up  leapt  Gjurashkovitch  with  a  roar. 
"  Cio  back,  you  bitches — go  back,  you  devils  !  Send 
those  women  back  !"'  The  lady-pack  had  cea^sed 
caterwauling,  and  was  trying  to  sneak  round  the 
shore  of  the  lake.  There  was  a  rush,  and  they  were 
rounded  up  and  headed  back,  and  the  row  began  all 
over  again.  I  tli<jught  bitterly  that  these  pef»ple 
were  pretending  to  Europe  that  they  were  carrying 
civilization  into  Albania,  and  that  there  were  folk  at 
home  fools  enough  to  believe  it. 

Dr.    K struggled   hard  aguiii.-t    the   perpetual 

stealing  in  the  hospital.  Kach  hospital  was  pmvided 
with  a  so-called  "  Kkonom,"  a  Montenegrin  who.se 
duty  was  to  see  that  all  supplies  ordered  by  the  doctor 
were  sent  up  from  the  depot.     One  of  our  Ekonom<, 


242        THE  STRUGGLE  FOB  SCUTARI 

a  theology  student,  was  descending  the  stairs,  when 
crash  fell  a  hospital  brandy  bottle  from  under 
his  coat.  I  wished  to  report  him  at  Cettigne,  and 
was  met  with  a  chorus:  "  It  is  all  paid  for  by  the  Red 
Cross  money  from  abroad.  Everyone  helps  him- 
self. If  the  highest  in  the  land  do,  why  not  we  ? 
If  you  report  him,  you  must  report  everybody."  It 
was  true.  The  lock  was  knocked  off  the  linen-box  in 
the  night,  and  most  of  the  contents  stolen.  Of  what 
went  to  the  wash  some  was  stolen  always.  We 
ordered  thirty  shirts  from  the  depot;  twenty-four 
came.  The  depot  swore  it  had  sent  thirty,  the  mes- 
senger that  she  had  brought  all  she  received.  Worst 
of  all,  the  attendants  stole  money  from  patients  too 

weak  to  protect  themselves.     K ,  at  the  end  of  his 

patience,  cried  one  day:  "  I  wish  to  God  they'd  steal 
the  corrosive  sublimate ;  it  is  the  only  thing  they  have 
not  taken  as   yet !"     He   stuck  to   his   task  most 
pluckily,  insisting  that  his  patients  should  have  what 
was   necessary,    wringing   condensed   milk,    quinine 
wine,  and  so  forth  from  the  Cettigne  central  depot, 
and  locking  it  up,  and  endeavouring  that  one  or  other 
of  our  little  European  staff  should  always  be  on  duty ; 
insisting  also  on  clean  shirts  and  drawers  for  each 
patient  when  he  arrived.     This  was  a  very  difficult 
task,  as  the  Montenegrins  had  been  keeping  all  the 
patients  in  the  dirty  uniforms  they  came  in  with, 
and  could  never  be  made  to  see  the  necessity  of  treat- 
ment or  diet. 

So  long  as  K was  in  command,  there  were  few 

pickings  for  any  of  the  employes,  so  they  intrigued 
against  him,  and  forced  him  to  offer  his  resignation, 
which  the  Montenegrin  Red  Cross  accepted  at  once. 


WAR  243 

They  had  already  crowded  out  similarly,  three  or  four 
other  foreign  volunteers.  We  had  done  five  weeks' 
severe  work  together,  and  lost  only  seven  patients, 
of  whom  one  was  brought  in  moribund;  one,  an 
enteric,  was  killed  by  his  friends,  who  threw  him 
pomegranates  and  cheese  through  the  window  when 
for  a  brief  interval  there  was  only  a  Montenegrin  in 
attendance;  and  a  third  who,  in  high  delirium,  sprang 
out  of  the  window  and  into  the  river.  A  Montenegrin 
woman  had  been  left  with  instructions  not  to  leave  him 
a  moment,  and  to  shout  for  help  if  needed.  She  "only 
went  down  to  the  door  to  speak  to  a  friend,  and  was 
quite  surprised  to  find  the  patient  gone."  However, 
both  she  and  the  pomegranate  woman  washed  their 
hands  of  all  responsibility,  and  declared  the  results  to 
be  the  will  of  God. 

It  is  a  curious  fact  that  no  priest  ever  visited  the 
sick  or  wounded  so  far  as  I  saw.  On  the  other  hand, 
if  a  man  showed  sign  of  collapse,  there  was  a  perfect 
rush  of  attendants  to  light  candles  round  liim,  and 
they  had  to  be  chivied  off,  to  make  space  to  give 
him  the  hypodermic  injection  necessary  to  pull  him 
round. 

When  K ,  under  whom  it  had  been  a  pleasure 

to  work,  resigned,  I  resigned  too;  but  K implored 

me  to  stay  on  till  a  decent  man  arrived  to  take  his 
place.  I  held  on,  therefore,  for  a  week  under  very 
difficult  circumstances  till  one  of  the  Bohemian  Red 
Cross  came  from  Cettignc.  He,  when  I  left,  could 
find  no  one  to  do  the  invalid  cookery,  and  resigned 
also.  And  the  Italians,  who  had  been  reinforced, 
took  over  the  fourth  house. 

I  was  almost  dead  beat,  for  at  the  last  I  had  been 


244        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

cooking  on  the  two  spirit-lamps,  and  serving  up  to 
eighty-five  portions  a  day,  as  well  as  doing  all  manner 
of  odd  jobs.  So  I  slept  for  the  best  part  of  two  days, 
and  then  rode  the  Houyhnhnm  out  on  the  plain  to 
consider  what  I  would  turn  to  next.  Christmas,  both 
new  and  old  style,  had  come  and  gone  drearily. 
Scutari  was  still  bravely  holding  out.  The  Monte- 
negrins had  proved  their  military  incompetency. 
Had  not  the  Maltsors  in  August  forced  the  Turks  to 
evacuate  most  of  the  frontier  outposts,  cut  off  Tuzi 


EX   IN   TERRA  PAX   HOMINIBUS. 


from  all  reinforcements,  and  then  not  only  admitted 
the  Montenegrin  army  through  their  mountains,  but 
also  aided  largely  in  the  capture  of  Dechich,  and  in 
clearing  the  way  for  the  advance  of  the  army,  I  do  not 
for  a  moment  believe  the  Montenegrins  would  have 
arrived  anywhere  near  Scutari — probably  not  even 
have  taken  Tuzi. 

Three  months  had  passed  since  the  firing  of  the 
first  shot,  and,  far  from  taking  Scutari  in  four  days, 
they  had  nothing  to  show  but  Medua  and  Tuzi,  and 


WAR  245 

a  number  of  defenceless  villages  that  had  been  burnt 
and  plundered. 

All  Europe  knew  that  the  Servian  army  was 
superior  to  the  Montenegrin.  The  Montenegrins  were 
intensely  embittered,  and  spoke  openly  and  angrily 
against  the  King,  and  especially  the  Royal  Princes. 
The  antidynastic  party  said  freely  that  the  Petro- 
vitches  were  the  bane  of  the  land.  Much  anger  was 
expressed  against  Princess  Xenia,  who  was  said  to 
have  undue  influence  with  the  Kinor  and  to  arrange 
the  movements  and  positions  of  battalions,  though 
ignorant  of  military  matters.  A  tale  ran  round  that 
a  Serb  officer,  visiting  the  Montenegrin  camp,  had 
said  that  in  twenty-four  hours  he  could  make  of  any 
of  his  privates  a  better  officer  than  any  in  the  Monte- 
negrin army. 

Meantime,  the  Peace  Conference  hargle-bargled  in 
London  for  weeks  without  result.  The  Montenegrin 
delegates  were  Miouskovitch,  the  best  of  the  three; 
Popovitch,  till  lately  Minister  in  Constantinople,  a 
man  of  no  particular  power;  and  Count  Louis  Voino- 
vitch,  an  Austrian  from  Ragusa.  He  had  been  em- 
ployed ten  years  ago  to  draft  the  Code  of  Laws  for 
Montenegro,  and  had  left  somewhat  suddenly.  Since 
then  he  had  done  odd  jobs  for  Servia  and  Bulgaria, 
and  was  reputed  to  know  the  back  of  Balkan  politic-;. 
His  sudden  recall  to  Montenegro  when  war  began, 
and  his  selection  as  delegate,  excited  much  comment 
and  jealousy.  It  was  a  tacit  admission  that  Monte- 
negro could  not  produce  three  home-grown  politicians 
fit  to  go  to  London.  And  the  report  current  at 
Ragusa  and  in  Montenegro  that  the  Count,  if  success- 
ful, was  to  be  rewarded  by  being  made  Governor  of 


246        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

Scutari  by  no  means  allayed  local  jealousy.  How  the 
delegates  were  getting  on  we  had  no  information  in 
Podgoritza.  One  tale  was  that  they  were  financed 
by  a  French  newspaper,  anxious  to  support  Slav 
interests. 

Without  Servian  aid  the  Montenegrins  could  never 
have  effectually  shut  in  Scutari.  As  it  was,  Hussein 
Riza  made  two  successful  sorties  in  December,  and 
revictualled  the  town  with  a  quantity  of  maize  from 
the  \'illage3  of  Pistulli,  Plesha,  and  Stajka.  It  was 
unthinkable  that  Europe  would  allow  Scutari  to  be 
starved  out  by  Servian  aid,  and  then  make  a  present 
of  it  to  Montenegro,  who  had  shown  herself  in  every 
way  unworthy.  So  furious  had  the  conduct  of  the 
Montenegrin  troops  made  the  Maltsors  that  they 
even  talked  of  attacking  them  and  cutting  them  off 
from  Podgoritza.  I  begged  them  not  to  attempt  it, 
as  it  would  bring  down  the  Servian  army  and  artillery 
upon  them,  and  result  in  a  hideous  massacre,  as  in 
Kosovo  vilayet.  Some  said  even  that  would  be 
better  than  to  be  handed  over  to  Montenegro  by  the 
Powers.  They  held  a  meeting  in  the  mountains,  and 
swore  they  would  resist  this  with  all  their  strength. 
*'  King  Nikola,"  they  said,  "  promised  only  last  year 
to  get  us  a  European  guarantee  for  our  national 
rights,  especially  for  schools  and  language.  He  be- 
trayed us,  and  now  the  Montenegrins  talk  of  nothing 
but  forcible  Slavizing.  We  have  not  fought  the 
Turks  for  two  years  on  the  language  question  in  order 
to  be  forced  to  learn  Servian.  The  army  which  pre- 
tended to  come  as  our  allies  to  help  us  has  com- 
mandeered our  hay  and  beasts,  and  not  paid.  We  will 
give  no  more." 


WAR  247 

Accordingly,  when  tlie  [Montenegrin  troops  fell  on 
the  Catholic  village  of  Mazreku,  seized  cattle,  and 
looted  the  church,  the  Catholic  tribesmen  opened  fire, 
and  seventeen  Montenegrins  were  killed  and  wounded. 
The  Montenegrins,  alarmed  lest  a  large  body  of  tribes- 
men might  descend  upon  them,  paid  up  full  damages. 
The  Mazreku  men  cashed  the  notes  at  once  in  Pod- 
goritza,  and  remarked:  "  In  future,  if  only  a  hen  is 
stolen,  we  shall  open  fire." 

The  desire  of  the  Orthodox  Montenegrins  to  stamp 
out  not  only  Mohammedanism,  but  Catholicism,  was 
shown  by  cutting  off  the  noses  of  images  of  the  saints, 
and  by  using  a  crucifix  as  a  mark  to  fire  at,  throwing 


MONTEXEGBrS   OPANKE. 


down  the  Host  from  the  altar,  and  similar  outrages 
in  more  than  one  church,  and  made  the  Catholic 
Maltsors  furious. 

Thus  did  the  Xew  Year  begin.  It  was  bitterly 
cold.  Misery  and  hatred  spread  over  all.  Enterics 
came  in  at  the  rate  of  ten  a  day,  and  overflowed  into 
most  of  the  hospitals.  News  from  the  front  was  that 
the  soldiers  were  in  rags,  and  often  barefoot,  and  were 
demoralized  by  long  waiting  in  the  trenches.  A  move 
must  be  made,  or  they  would  lose  their  nerve.  Yanko 
telegraphed  for  seven  more  battalions,  and  it  was 
recognized  that  Servian  aid  must  be  accepted,  i 
st\\\  hoped  Europe  would  save  Scutari,  and  gave  all 


248         THE  STEUGGLE  FOE  SCUTAEI 

my  energies  to  helping,  not  the  butchers,  but  the 
victims. 

The  prisoners  were  in  an  indescribably  wretched 
state.  Thirty  Moslem  women  and  children  were 
crowded  into  an  upper  room  of  a  dismantled,  half- 
ruined  house.  The  windows  were  broken,  and  the 
icy  wind  whistled  through  the  broken  floor.  Bedding 
or  covering  they  had  none,  and  a  daily  ration  of  dry 
bread  was  all  they  received  to  live  on.  The  misery 
of  the  poor  little  children  touched  even  the  gendarmes 
on  guard,  and  they  begged  me  to  give  help.  Police 
Captain  Vrbitza,  whom  I  knew  well,  gave  me  per- 
mission, and  told  me  that  their  husbands  and  brothers 
had  all  been  taken  prisoners  at  Drishti  for  trying  to 
defend  their  village,  and  that,  when  on  the  way  to 
Podgoritza,  had  unfortunately  tried  to  escape.  For 
this  they  had  all,  he  regretted  to  say,  been  killed.  I 
subsequently  learnt  that  they  had  not  been  killed  in 
hot  blood  at  the  time,  but  that  a  few  days  later  they 
had  all  twenty-six  been  put  in  a  row  by  order  of 
Prince  Danilo,  and  shot  down.  Some  of  them  were 
mere  boys.  "  I  Biri  Kralit,"  the  King's  son — i.e., 
Prince  Danilo — gained  an  unenviable  reputation  in 
Albania.  Brigadier  Bechir,  who  was  with  him,  was 
nicknamed  the  Montenegrin  Nero. 

The  unhappy  women  had  followed  after  their 
arrested  men,  and  believed  them  to  be  in  prison, 
and  no  one  had  as  yet  undeceived  them.  They  had 
been  well-to-do  peasants,  and  their  sufferings  were 
piteous.  Sobbing  bitterly,  they  embraced  me  and 
prayed  for  leave  to  see  their  men.  Food  and  clothing 
I  gave.  Fortunately,  I  had  just  received  a  bale  of 
excellent  native-shaped  garments  from  England,  and 


WAK  249 

I  supplied  a  pan  of  charcoal  to  keep  off  the  cold. 
One  thing  more  they  begged — some  soap.  They  were 
used  to  plenty  of  clean  clothes,  and  had  no  means  of 
washing.  I  went  to  Stanko  Markovitch  and  begged 
he  would  either  find  better  quarters  for  the  poor 
creatures  or  allow  me  to  do  so.  He  made  endless 
promises,  and  did  nothing.  I  wished  to  leave  Pod- 
goritza,  to  visit  the  other  side  of  the  lake,  but  was 
begged  by  the  town  Moslems,  for  the  sake  of  the 
prisoners,  not  to  go.  I  thought  of  the  outcry  a  few 
months  ago,  when  thirty  Serb  women  and  children 
were  prisoners  in  Berani,  and  I  appealed  again  to 
Stanko,  speaking  of  the  poor  things  as  "  widows  and 
orphans."  His  snaky  eyes  contracted  with  anger. 
"They  are  not!"  he  cried.  "Their  husbands  are 
rebels  in  the  mountains.  Some  Albanian  has  told 
you  that  lie  !"  "  Captain  Vrbitza  told  me  the  facts, 
and  asked  me  to  help  the  women,"  I  said.  Stanko 
was  furious,  but  dared  not  deny  the  truth,  and  after 
much  trouble  I  had  the  whole  paity  transferred  to  a 
decent  place  in  the  Moslem  quarter,  where  the  neigh- 
bours looked  after  them  and  the  Government  allowed 
them  a  meat  ration. 

The  other  inmates  of  the  prisoners'  house  were  like- 
wise in  a  terrible  plight.  A  number  of  sheds  at  the 
end  of  the  yard  were  filled  with  Catholic  and  Moslem 
Albanians,  caught  by  the  soldiers  for  no  particular 
reason  that  I  could  learn.  Many  were  heavily  ironed ; 
all  were  half  naked,  shivering,  and  emaciated,  re- 
ceiving just  enough  bread  to  keep  them  alive,  and 
sleeping  on  the  damp  earth  with  no  covering.  A 
cartload  of  firewood,  shirts,  and  some  lumps  of  cheese 
and  strings  of  onions  lightened  their  sufferings,  an<l 


250        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

after  the  war  I  met  more  than  one  in  Albania  who 
thanked  me  warmly. 

There  was  even  a  lower  depth  of  misery.  Up  under 
the  roof  of  the  half-ruined  house  were  about  sixty 
Moslems — men,  women,  and  children.  They  were 
from  the  Berani  district,  and  had  fled  before  the 
Montenegrin  army  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  war. 
Over  the  mountains,  through  snow,  hither  and  thither, 
they  had  wandered,  flying  now  from  the  Monte- 
negrins, now  from  the  invading  Serbs.  They  had 
eaten  or  sold  such  few  beasts  as  they  fled  with,  had 
begged  food,  eaten  grass  and  dead  leaves.  Thirty  of 
the  party  had  died  on  the  way  of  misery.  Finally, 
they  were  taken  prisoners  by  the  Serbs  near  Durazzo, 
and  handed  over  to  the  Montenegrins  as  prisoners. 
Now,  shut  in  this  wind-swept  attic,  smallpox  had 
broken  out  among  the  children.  The  cases,  luckily, 
were  few  and  slight.  The  whole  party  was  supposed 
to  be  isolated,  but  some  managed  generally  to  get 
out  and  beg  in  the  town,  for  they  were  perishing  of 
cold  and  hunger  on  the  dry-bread  ration  allowed 
them.  I  supplied  these  poor  creatures  with  fire  and 
food.  One  family  I  remember  vividly.  The  mother 
told  how  her  three  little  girls  all  died  on  the  way. 
One  got  wet  through  crossing  a  river,  and  died  of 
cold  next  day;  the  two  others  had  died  of  hunger. 
She  believed  she  had  been  flying  for  a  whole  year 
from  the  soldiers,  and  had  lost  all  count  of  time.  I 
said  the  war  had  only  lasted  four  months.  "I  do 
not  know,"  she  said;  "  it  seems  like  years."  So  soon 
as  the  children  were  well  they  all  had  to  leave  and 
tramp  back  to  their  burnt  homes.  Their  gratitude 
to  me  was  most  touching.     "  You  are  the  only  person 


WAR  251 

who  has  been  kind  to  us,"  said  the  man.  "  I  did  not 
know  Christians  could  be  so  good."  They  kissed  my 
heart,  and  the  woman  swore  sisterhood  with  me.  I 
gave  them  opanke  (sandals)  for  the  march,  but  I  fear 
they  must  have  returned  home  only  to  be  left  to 
starve,  that  their  land  may  be  given  to  a  Christian. 

Some  members  of  the  French  Red  Cross  turned  up 
in  search  of  stores,  and  told  of  the  Montenegrin 
cruelty  to  the  conquered.  A  crowd  of  terrified 
Albanian  women  and  children,  two  wounded,  had 
arrived  one  wet  night,  drenched  and  exhausted, 
flying  from  a  burning  village.  The  Montenegrins 
refused  them  help  or  even  shelter.  The  French  took 
pity  on  them,  put  them  into  an  empty  stable,  and 
began  to  make  some  tea.  A  Montenegrin  soldier 
came  and  kicked  over  the  pot,  saying  that  such 
beasts  should  have  nothing.  The  Montenegrin  doctor 
had  refused  to  help  a  wounded  Albanian,  and  the 
French  had  rescued  him,  and  so  forth.  A  dree  tale 
of  the  woe  of  the  conquered. 

In  Podgoritza,  when  maize  was  given  to  women 
whose  men  were  at  the  front,  Catholics  applied  in 
vain,  and  received  insults  instead  of  help.  It  was 
reported  and  believed  that  the  battalions  of  Albanians 
who  were  Montenegrin  subjects  were  purposely  put 
in  the  most  dangerous  positions,  and  Podgoritzans 
amused  themselves  by  visiting  the  shops  of  Catholic 
tradesmen  and  describing  to  them  the  manner  in 
which  their  relatives  in  Scutari  would  be  massacred 
so  soon  as  the  town  fell. 

A  youth  in  officer's  uniform  sat  next  me  one  day 
at  table,  and  boasted  that  in  two  years  no  one  would 
dare  speak  Albanian  in  Scutari.     I  pointed  out  that 


252        THE  STEUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

the  Albanians  had  been  under  the  Romans,  the 
Byzantine  Empire,  the  Bulgars,  the  Serbs,  and  the 
Turks,  and  still  spoke  their  own  language.  "  Do  you 
suppose,"  I  asked,  ''  that  in  two  years  Montenegro 
can  effect  what  all  these  have  failed  to  do  in  over  a 
thousand  years  ?"  He  could  not  reply.  But  some- 
one else  said  that  if  Europe  would  give  Montenegro 
a  large  piece  of  Albania,  they  would  soon  settle  the 
Albanian  question  by  destroying  every  Albanian  in  it. 
I  afterwards  discovered  that  the  language-suppressing 
youth  was  one  of  the  Petrovitches — a  relative  of  the 
King. 

It  may  be  recollected  that  little  more  than  a  year 
before  Prince  Danilo,  interviewed  by  the  Morning 
Post  about  Albania,  had  declared:  "  It  grieves  my 
heart  to  see  the  uncultured  mountaineers  die  for  the 
liberty  of  having  their  own  schools  for  their  own 
children." 

Nor  was  I  long  left  without  proof  that  the  Monte- 
negrins, as  well  as  the  Serbs,  had  begun  the  work  of 
extermination.  A  cheerful  voice  hailed  me  one  even- 
ing under  the  trees,  and  up  came  Yanko  Vukotitch's 
young  friend,  whom  I  had  met  at  Yanko's  the  night 
before  they  left  Cettigne  together  to  begin  the  war. 
He  had  been  all  through  the  campaign  as  Yanko's 
secretary,  and  was  now  appointed  secretary  to  the 
Prefect  of  the  newly  annexed  town  of  Bijelopolje. 
"  Come  and  have  dinner  at  the  Balkan  Hotel  with 
me,  and  I  will  tell  you  all  about  it,"  he  cried.  The 
only  stiff  fighting  had  been,  he  said,  at  the  taking  of 
Bijelopolje.  "  After  this,  the  power  of  the  Albanians 
was  broken.  We  killed  quantities;  they  could  not 
escape."     He  made  no  concealment  of  Montenegro's 


WAR  253 

hope  of  getting  rid  of  all  the  Moslems  and  resettling 
the  land.  His  pitilessness  was  disgusting.  "  For 
example,"  he  said,  "  we  have  killed  every  man  of  the 
Riigova  tribe.  We  overpowered  them,  and  then 
made  every  one  of  them  pass  under  the  sword.  I 
assure  you  not  one  remains."  I  expressed  strong 
disgust  for  the  cold-blooded  slaughter  of  helpless 
prisoners.  "  But  they  are  beasts,"  he  cried — "  savage 
animals.  We  have  done  very  well."  Of  the  fate  of 
the  women  he  professed  ignorance. 

This  slaughter  was  planned  deliberately,  for  I  pos- 
sess a  letter  from  a  friend,  describing  a  conversation 
with  Prince  Danilo  in  September,  before  the  war,  in 
which  he  said  of  the  Rugova  Moslems:  '*  We  have 
sworn  to  exterminate  them  !"  banging  the  table. 

Everywhere,  according  to  the  secretary,  they  were 
dealing  out  "  justice."  The  children  of  the  slaugh- 
tered would  be  sent  to  Serb  schools,  and  Slavizing  be 
effected  quickly.  He  spoke  bitterly  of  the  bother  of 
having  to  do  with  people  who  spoke  Albanian  only, 
and  said  the  language  must  be  suppressed  as  fast  as 
possible.  He  had  been  all  over  the  country  with  the 
Serbs  and  Yanko.  "  And  what  of  the  Prochaska 
affair  ?  Have  the  Austrians  exaggerated  that  ?"  I 
asked.  He  laughed  aloud.  "  Exaggerated  I"  cried  he 
joyfully;  "  it  is  not  possible  to  exaggerate  it.  On  the 
contrary,  Austria  will  never  dare  to  tell  the  truth. 
She  would  be  laughed  at  by  all  Euro2:)e,  and  be  forced 
to  declare  war.  What  was  done  to  him  ?  Oh  !  the 
Servian  officers  played  fine  tricks  on  him.  Every 
kind  of  indignity,  all  that  you  can  imagine  that  is 
most  dirty,  was  done  upon  him.  They  spat  in  his 
face,  he  was  rolled  on  the  ground.     He  will  never  tell 


254        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

what  was  done  to  liim."  He  roared  with  laughter. 
"  And  the  Austrian  flag,  too.  If  you  had  but  seen 
it !"  "  Is  it  true,"  I  asked,  "  that  he  was  also  shut 
up  ?"  "  Of  course  he  was — for  days.  I  swear  to 
you,  Austria  will  never  publish  the  facts."  "  But 
why  was  this  done  ?"  "  Because  he  invited  a  lot  of 
dirty  Albanians  to  his  Consulate."  "  But  a  Consul 
has  the  right  to  invite  whom  he  wall  to  his  house. 
Moreover,  Europe  had  entrusted  Austria  with  the 
protection  of  the  Catholic  Albanians,  and  he  repre- 
sented Austria."  "  Very  well,  this  has  taught  Austria 
that  one  has  no  more  need  of  her  Consuls.  The  day 
of  Austria  is  over." 

It  is  noteworthy  that  he  brought  no  accusation 
against  Prochaska  of  having  fired  from  the  Con- 
sulate, as  did  the  Serbs  in  defence  of  their  treatment 
of  him ;  and  as  the  rest  of  his  tale  was  true,  his  version 
of  the  Prochaska  affair  is  probably  true,  too. 

At  the  beginning  of  February  came  the  news  that 
Hussein  Riza  Bey  was  dead — shot,  said  some,  by  dis- 
contented soldiers.  Others  accused  Essad  Pasha. 
This  delighted  the  Montenegrins,  and  preparations 
for  a  big  attack  were  made.  Sokol  Batzi  received 
orders  to  summon  4,000  Maltsors,  and  advance  with 
them.  The  King  promised  them  three  days'  free 
looting  and  "go  as  you  please  "  in  Scutari  if  they 
would  help  take  it.  But  scarcely  any  turned  up. 
Not  one  man  of  all  the  big  Klimenti  tribe,  and  but 
thirty  from  Hoti,  and  a  few  others.  Those  who  did 
come  were  given  tw^enty  francs  apiece  and  a  supply 
of  cartridges,  with  which  nearly  all  of  them  retired 
at  night  to  their  mountains.  "  Old  King  Nikola  is 
an  awful  liar,"  said  one  of  them,  telling  me  the  tale 


WAR  255 

after  the  war.  "  So  are  you  !"  said  I.  He  laughed 
delightedly.  "Yes,  I  know,  my  sister;  but  I  lied 
better  than  he  !" 

On  February  7  bombarding  was  plainly  audible, 
and  Podgoritza  was  in  a  state  of  nervous  tension. 
The  combined  attack  had  begun.  I  applied  for  leave 
to  go  again  to  the  front,  but  before  it  arrived  Stanko 
Markovitch  said  to  me  sarcastically:  "You  had 
better  wait  for  leave  to  enter  Scutari.  We  took 
Bardhanjolt  this  morning,  and  the  Serbs  took  Ber- 
ditza.  In  four  days  we  shall  be  in  Scutari."  I  could 
not  resist  saying:  "  Yes,  so  I  heard  in  October." 

There  was  a  wild  rush  of  excitement,  followed  by 
an  ominous  silence.  Officially,  there  were  no  news  at 
all.  Late  at  night  the  Albanians  spread  rumours  of 
a  huge  Montenegrin  catastrophe,  and,  tremulous  with 
hope,  whispered:  "God  will  never  let  these  devils 
storm  Scutari." 

The  8th  dawned,  and  the  town  was  dumb  all  day. 
At  sundown  I  saw  the  Montenegrin  doctor,  Radulo- 
vitch,  sending  carriages  and  stretchers  down  to  the 
steamer  port  on  the  lakeside.  "  How  many  wounded 
are  there  ?"  I  asked.     "  Forty-eight,"  said  he. 

All  night  long  I  heard  the  constant  rumble  of  the 
motor  lorries  as  they  rushed  from  port  to  town  and 
back,  and  went  out  early  to  find  the  wounded  pouring 
in  in  a  ceaseless  stream.  The  Montenegrins  had 
talked  for  months  about  storming  Scutari,  and,  as 
usual,  made  no  preparations.  The  scenes  that  follow 
defy  description.  A  number  of  the  foreign  doctors 
had  left;  the  hospitals  were  blocked  with  the  sick. 
The  wounded,  many  of  whom  had  had  no  food  for 
three  days,  and  had  not  had  their  wounds  properly 


256         THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

dressed,  were  thrown  in  heaps  on  the  dirty  floors  of 
every  drink-shop,  empty  house,  and  shop.  Bedding 
there  was  none  ready,  save  nine  mattresses  I 
had  had  made,  and  some  blankets  I  had  received 
from  England.  Men  almost  too  weak  to  stand,  just 
recovering  from  enteric,  were  turned  out  into  the 
streets  to  make  room,  and  crawled  about  begging 
shelter,  driven  pitilessly  from  every  door,  for  the 
Montenegrins  are  terrified  of  infection. 

I  had  not  intended  giving  more  help  to  the  wounded, 
but  under  the  circumstances  could  not  refuse,  though 
my  permit  for  the  front  had  come.  I  worked  under 
Radulovitch.  Everything  was  lacking.  I  tore  up  a 
bale  of  old  sheets  from  England  for  bandages,  and 
hacked  box-lids  into  splints.  The  first  afternoon  my 
nail-scissors  and  my  corrosive  sublimate  were  our  only 
outfit.  The  next  few  days  passed  in  a  mad  rush. 
Wounded  poured  in  daily  till  it  was  said  there  were 
at  least  1,500  in  the  town,  but  I  never  knew  the 
precise  figure.  Cettigne,  too,  was  crammed.  A  row 
of  Montenegrin  women  squatted  at  the  top  of  the 
street,  and  hurled  themselves  on  each  motor  lorry  as 
it  arrived,  and  we  had  to  bar  them  out  by  force  from 
our  temporary  hospitals,  for  the  men  were  all  on  the 
floor,  and  in  looking  for  one,  the  women  tumbled  over 
a  dozen. 

AVe  went  from  house  to  house,  dressing  seventy  in 
one,  fifty  in  another,  and  shouting  through  windows, 
"  Has  a  doctor  been  here  ?"  to  any  wounded  inside. 
Numbers  were  overlooked,  and  were  in  a  stinking 
state  when  found.  Many  volunteers  returned  from 
America  were  furious  at  "  being  thrown  like  dogs  on 
the  ground,"   and  demanded  beds  and  shirts.     All 


WAR  257 

raged  against  their  officers,  whose  ignorance  had,  they 
said,  brought  about  this  debacle.  The  Montenegrins 
had  been  cut  up  at  Bardhanjolt,  and  the  Servians 
smashed  at  Berditza.  Montenegi"0  alone  was  beheved 
to  have  lost  5,000  killed  and  wounded.  The  men 
related  that  the  Serbs  had  arranged  to  bombard 
Bardhanjolt  for  a  certain  time,  and  that  when  they 
had  dislodged  the  Turks,  the  Montenegrins  should 
rush  the  height  and  occupy  it.  The  Montenegrin 
officer  had  stupidly  ordered  his  men  to  charge  too 
soon,  and  rushed  them  straight  into  the  Serb  fire. 
The  Serbs,  seeing  the  Montenegrins  falling  under  their 
fire,  ceased.  The  Turks,  relieved  from  bombardment, 
drove  the  Montenegrins  back  down  the  hill,  killing 
them  in  heaps.     Three  battalions  were  cut  to  pieces. 

It  took  two  more  bombardments  and  charges  before 
the  place  was  taken.  Some  eyewitnesses  gave  a 
horrible  account  of  the  Berditza  blunder,  which  the 
soldiers  declared  also  to  be  the  fault  of  Montenegrin 
officers,  who  had  misinformed  the  Serbs.  Orders  and 
counter-orders  were  given,  with  the  result  that  at 
dawn  the  Serbs  found  themselves  at  the  mercy  of  the 
big  guns  of  Berditza,  were  bogged  in  the  muddy 
plain,  fell  in  heaps  in  the  ditches,  and  lost  about 
1,000  men  "  struggling  in  the  mud  helpless  as  birds 
in  bird-lime." 

At  Bardhanjolt,  they  complained,  there  was  no 
doctor  but  a  Montenegrin  one,  who  had  gone  to  look 
on,  and  had  not  even  a  bandage  with  him.  No 
foreign  doctors  were  ever  allowed  on  the  field.  "  Xo 
wonder,"  said  some  of  the  **  Americans,"  "  for  the  way 
the  Turkish  corpses  were  stripped  and  mutilated  was 
disgusting!"     One    man   told   thatThe    had   helped 

17 


258        THE  STEUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

bury  some  Montenegrin  corpses  at  Bardhanjolt  which 
had  lain  unburied  since  the  attack  in  October.  Their 
clothes  were  intact.  "  Had  they  been  Turkish 
corpses  they  would  have  been  stripped  and  cut  up  !" 
he  said  bitterly.  "  What  can  you  expect  ?  Look 
at  the  way  our  Red  Cross  is  conducted."  They 
related,  as  indeed  I  had  heard  before,  that  no  organ- 
ized search  for  wounded  was  ever  made.  If  a  man 
had  friends,  they  cut  boughs,  tied  them  with  their 
sashes,  and  carried  him  to  the  nearest  field  hospital. 
If  not,  and  he  were  too  badly  wounded  to  walk,  he 
died.  Many,  they  vowed,  had  died  of  cold  at 
Bardhanjolt. 

Those  Montenegrins,  I  found,  who  had  left  their 
native  land  quite  young,  w^ere  horrified  at  the  savagery 
they  found.  Those,  on  the  other  hand,  who  had  left 
it  when  well  over  twenty,  had  not  absorbed  civiliza- 
tion, and  reverted  at  once,  and  told  of  their  mutilating 
prowess  with  glee.  Only  in  Martinovitch's  army  was 
it  forbidden,  according  to  the  men.  And  there  the 
foreign  correspondents,  military  attaches,  and  Red 
Crosses  were  freely  let  loose. 

The  immediate  effect  of  the  debacle  on  the  Monte- 
negrins was  that  they  were  crazed  with  thwarted 
blood-lust.  Instead  of  respecting  a  foe  who  had 
bravely  resisted  for  nearly  five  months,  they  were 
furious,  and  talked  loudly  of  their  right  to  butcher 
every  man,  woman,  and  child  in  Scutari.  They 
would  make  a  house-to-house  visitation  at  night,  and 
next  day  the  Powers  might  protest  as  much  as  they 
pleased — it  would  not  bring  the  Albanians  to  life 
again.  And  they  would  burn  the  town  to  the  ground. 
The  Serb  newspaper  Piemont  favoured  this  scheme. 


WAR  259 

Even  the  postmaster,  when  I  went  to  cash  a  contri- 
bution to  my  relief  fund,  said,  "  You  need  not  keep 
any  of  this  for  Scutari.  You  wdll  find  no  sick  nor 
wounded  there.  We  have  got  a  remedy  for  them;" 
and  he  imitated  bayoneting.  A  lot  of  them  chuckled 
over  their  beer.  "  It  will  be  a  second  St.  Bartholo- 
mew's night,"  said  one.  "  Worse  still,  Sodom  and 
Gomorrha  !"  said  another.  The  destruction  of  prop- 
erty was  of  no  consequence.  "  We  want  the  land 
and  position — not  a  lot  of  dirty  Albanians.  Europe 
will  give  us  a  million  to  build  a  fine  modern  town  like 
Cettigne  !" 

When  I  heard  the  doctor  telling  the  men  they  must 
get  well  quickly  to  assist  in  this  and  enjoy  fat  Turkish 
"  bulas  "  (married  women),  I  threw  up  helping  to  cure 
them,  after  first  telling  them  that  there  was  no  hurry. 
Europe  would  never  let  them  have  Scutari. 

Some  members  of  the  Italian  Red  Cross  stopped  me 
in  the  street,  and  said:  "  If  you  want  to  do  a  really 
humane  thing,  help  the  Nizam  prisoners;  their  con- 
dition is  a  scandal. ' '  Numbers  of  them  were  employed 
in  forced  labour  in  the  town  making  shoes  for  the 
army,  and  road- making.  But  some  1 ,500  were  camped 
out  on  the  plain  near  Docle.  I  filled  my  saddle-bags 
with  shirts  and  rode  thither.  The  sentry  challenged 
me,  but  I  said  I  had  come  for  the  sick,  and  he  let 
me  pass.  I  found  a  military  surgeon,  Ruzhdi  Bey, 
an  Albanian,  with  a  few  medicine  bottles  on  a  rock, 
doing  what  he  could  for  a  number  of  half-naked, 
emaciated  men  in  the  last  stages  of  misery  who  filed 
past.  Many  had  nothing  but  a  lagged  coat  and 
trousers  split  to  the  knee.  In  tents  they  lay  on  the 
damp  ground  dying  slowdy  of  cold  and  misery.     Their 


260        THE  STEUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

greatcoats  and  blankets  had  all  been  looted.  The 
wretched  Asiatics  were  in  the  most  pitiable  state. 
Ruzhdi  Bey  turned  and  said  to  me :  ''  What  is  the 
good  of  giving  this  stuff  " — pointing  to  the  bottles  of 
tonic — "  when  they  have  neither  shirt  nor  blanket  V 
He  begged  for  at  least  twenty-five  blankets  for  men 
who  must  otherwise  die. 

I  supplied  Ruzhdi  with  all  the  clothing  I  could 
collect.  This,  too,  angered  the  Montenegrins,  though 
I  was  unaware  of  it  at  the  time.  They  had  not  meant 
that  the  state  of  the  prisoners  should  be  known. 
When  they  found  that  I  knew  it,  they  transported  the 
sick  into  dirty  hovels  in  the  old  town,  and  then  invited 
a  German  doctor,  who  was  in  Cettigne,  to  inspect  the 
camp,  and  obtained  from  him  a  certificate  of  the 
health  of  all,  and  accused  me  afterwards  of  lying. 
Unaware  of  this  at  the  time,  and  not  imagining  that 
any  human  being  could  object  to  the  relief  of  such 
suffering,  I  visited  frequently  the  quarters  of  the  sick 
Nizams.  A  painful  scene  indeed  !  Dark  foul  rooms 
crowded  with  little  Anatolians  and  a  few  Albanians. 
I  remembered  seeing  them  march  in  but  four  months 
ago  in  the  fiush  of  youth  and  strength.  Now  the 
wretched  Asiatics,  yellow  and  shrivelled  with  cold, 
held  out  lean  paws  like  monkeys,  and  stared  at  me 
with  hollow  eyes,  imploring,  with  chattering  teeth, 
for  a  garment  that  would  keep  out  the  cold.  Nearly 
all  were  barefoot,  and  their  bare  breasts,  on  which  the 
ribs  stood  out  like  grids,  were  raw  with  scratching, 
for  the  place  was  alive  with  vermin.  Of  the  1,500,  the 
Turkish  doctors  reported  that  in  all  700  fell  ill  and  at 
least  200  died.  Fighting  and  wounds  are  the  least 
terrible   part   of   war.     Tons   of   sentimentality   are 


WAR  261 

lavished  on  the  hero  who  has  had  a  Mauser  bullet 
through  his  calf  and  is  fit  for  the  front  in  ten  days. 
It  is  to  those  that  drop  in  the  track  of  war,  and  rot 
with  hunger  and  misery,  that  pity  is  really  due. 

A  piteous  appeal  came  to  me  from  the  people  of 
the  village  of  Vlandje,  burnt  by  the  Montenegrins  at 
the  very  beginning  of  the  war.  I  found  them  all 
quartered  in  the  outhouses  of  Moslem  families  at 
Tuzi.  Most  of  them  had  used  all  of  such  little  stores 
as  they  had  saved,  were  living  on  Moslem  charity, 
and  were  very  miserable.  I  gave  them  tickets  to 
obtain  flour  in  the  town. 

It  was  March,  but  still  bitterly  cold.  My  friend  of 
last  year,  the  little  priest  of  Summa,  came  with  two 
Summa  men,  all  in  great  misery,  to  beg  some  clothes. 
Summa,  up  in  the  mountains,  was  untouched  by  war, 
but  cut  off  from  all  trade  and  in  wretched  plight. 
Mindful  of  his  last  year's  hospitality,  I  gave  the  poor 
man  a  blanket  as  well  as  clothing.  Outside  the  hotel 
he  was  arrested  by  the  police,  and  taken  before  Stanko 
Markovitch,  who  threatened  him  that  if  he  was  ever 
caught  asking  help  of  the  Englishwoman  again,  he 
should  be  hanged.  Another  priest  who  had  asked 
for  flour  for  his  flock  was  similarly  treated.  And 
police  at  the  entrance  of  the  town,  searched  the 
wretched  Vlandje  people  for  flour  tickets,  and 
destroyed  the  few  that  they  found.  The  others 
luckily  had  taken  their  flour.  All  these  people  were 
non-combatants  and  in  great  want;  there  was  no 
political  capital  to  be  made  at  all,  and  some  of  them 
were  actually  Montenegrin  subjects.  I  went  straight 
to  Stanko  to  ask  why  charity  was  forbidden.  He 
had  not  expected  this,  as  he  was  accustomed  only  to 


262         THE  STRUGGLE  FOE  SCUTARI 

underhand  dealing,  and  shuffled  and  lied  miserably. 
Montenegro  was  so  rich  it  was  unnecessary — but  there 
was  little  in  the  land  but  paper- money — he  feared  the 
people  would  be  pauperized,  and  so  forth.  Finally 
his  object  was  clear — if  I  would  give  him  the  money, 
he  would  distribute  it.  Knowing  the  family  reputa- 
tion for  embezzling,  I  declined,  and  said  I  would 
inform  England  of  Montenegro's  extreme  wealth, 
and  see  that  no  more  relief  money  was  given  her. 
This  upset  him  much,  and  in  order  to  be  safe  against 
any  hanky-panky  I  transferred  the  whole  relief  fund 
from  the  Montenegrin  Bank  to  London. 

Much  information  on  the  subject  was  brought  to 
me.  Podgoritza  blamed  Stanko  for  being  such  a  fool 
as  to  have  let  his  policy  of  starving  out  the  Moslems 
and  Catholics  be  seen.  "  She  will  certainly  denounce 
it  not  only  in  England,  but  in  America."  And  as 
Stanko  aspired  to  be  Governor  of  Scutari,  this  upset 
him  considerably. 

As  I  had  had  news  from  a  reliable  source  that  the 
representatives  of  the  Powers  had  impressed  very 
strongly  upon  the  Montenegrin  Government  that  the 
much-talked-of  destruction  of  Scutari  must  not  take 
place,  that  in  no  case  would  Montenegro  be  allowed 
to  retain  it  even  if  it  fell,  and  that  it  was  hoped  that 
peace  was  about  to  be  signed,  I  decided  to  wait  and 
watch  events. 

Meantime  the  Montenegrins  turned  the  screw  down 
on  the  civilian  prisoners.  It  was  rumoured  one  night 
that  Ruzhdi  Bey,  the  doctor,  contrary  to  the  rules 
of  the  Geneva  Convention,  had  been  taken  to  Dani- 
lovgrad  and  there  imprisoned. 

At  7.30  next  morning,  as  I  was  writing  in  my  bed- 


WAR  263 

room,  came  a  tap  at  my  door,  and  a  small  voice,  in 
French,  cried:  "  Open,  in  God's  name  !"  In  tumbled 
in  his  pyjamas  the  little  old  Kaimmakam  of  Tuzi — a 
most  unlucky  man.  He  had  taken  on  the  office  for 
a  month,  while  Mihilaki  Effendi  went  on  leave  to  be 
married.  In  the  interval  war  was  declared,  and  he 
taken  prisoner.  He  was  quartered  in  the  hotel,  but 
beyond  an  occasional  "  Bon  jour,  monsieur,"  I  had 
had  little  to  do  with  him.  Now  he  rushed  in  like  a 
hunted  animal,  crying,  "  Save  me,  mademoiselle  !" 
fumbled  in  his  breast,  and  pulled  out  £T540  in  gold 
and  a  draft  on  the  Ottoman  Bank,  and  a  crumpled 
paper  with  addresses.  "  Take  it,"  he  said.  "  Last 
night  they  arrested  Ruzhdi  Bey.  To-day  I  have 
heard  they  will  lock  me  up,  too.  It  is  the  money  they 
are  after.  They  will  rob  me.  They  must  not  have 
it ;  it  is  for  my  poor  vdie.     If  they  kill  me,  you  must 

send  it "     He  explained  the  addresses.     "  If  not, 

you  will  be  able  to  find  me  later."  He  turned  to  go. 
"  But,  monsieur — such  a  large  sum — I  must  give  you 

a  receipt "     "  Non,  non,"  panted  the  little  man, 

"  they  would  find  it  and  take  the  money  from  you. 
And  you  are  English;  a  receipt  is  not  necessary.  Ah, 
they  are  coming  I"  A  heavy  tramp  sounded  on  the 
outdoor  staircase.  Like  a  rabbit  the  Kaimmakam 
bolted,  and  dashed  into  the  lavatory.  He  was  met 
on  emerging  by  a  gendarme,  and  conducted  to  his 
room.  I  was  left  thunderstruck  with  a  pile  of  Turkish 
money.  It  was  too  much  to  carry  on  me,  and  I 
feared  to  leave  it  in  my  room,  so  I  conveyed  it  in  a 
safe  place  beyond  Montenegrin  reach.  The  Kaim- 
makan  was  kept  close  prisoner.  I  felt  anxious.  His 
door  was  open  one  day,  so  I  strolled  up  and  asked  the 


264        THE  STEUGGLE  FOE  SCUTAEI 

gendarme  a  question.  The  poor  Kaimmakam  was 
sitting  hunched  up  on  his  bed.  "  Are  you  ill?"  I 
asked.  "  No,  no,  not  ill,"  he  said.  "  I  may  not 
speak  to  anyone."  Some  five  weeks  later,  when  he 
was  released  by  the  German  Minister,  I  gave  him 
back  his  money  at  the  German  Legation,  and  he  told 
me  what  had  happened.  "  I  was  not  ill  that  day, 
but  black  and  sore  all  over  my  back.  The  police  said 
to  me :  '  You  have  two  thousand  francs ;  you  must 
give  it  to  us.'  They  searched  my  room  and  my  clothes 
all  through.  They  were  very  angry,  and  said  they 
would  make  me  give  it.  They  came  and  beat  me 
three  times.  You  have  saved  me."  Quite  unnerved 
by  what  he  had  gone  through,  he  overwhelmed  me 
with  thanks,  and  left  the  country  before  dawn  under 
German  protection.  Anxious  as  to  Euzhdi  Bey's 
fate,  I  asked  the  German  Minister  to  make  inquiries 
at  once.  He  replied  next  day  that  the  Montenegrin 
Government  declared  the  report  of  Euzhdi's  imprison- 
ment to  be  untrue. 

I  met  Euzhdi,  however,  six  months  later,  and  learnt 
that  he  had  been  shut  up  for  over  two  months  without 
bedding  or  covering,  had  never  been  told  why,  and 
had  been  prevented  from  communicating  with  the 
German  Legation. 

The  Government's  declarations  were  frequently 
inaccurate.  It  is  said  that  upon  one  occasion,  when 
the  King  made  a  more  than  usually  unprobable 
statement,  the  representative  of  one  of  the  Great 
Powers  replied  politely:  "  Your  Majesty  is  celebrated 
throughout  Europe  as  a — poet !" 


CHAPTER  XIV 

THE   FALL   OF   SCUTARI 

Meanwhile  the  Montenegrins,  having  failed,  in  spite 
of  all  their  boasting,  to  take  Scutari,  strove  madly 
to  convince  Europe  that  Scutari  was  their  birth- 
right. 

Few  Montenegrins  had  ever  been  there,  and  had 
not  the  faintest  idea  that  it  had  far  better  shops 
and  hotel  accommodation  than  their  capital  Cettigne. 
They  ought  to  have  known,  for  in  that  very  capital, 
if  you  wanted  a  decent  meal  at  a  reasonable  price,  you 
had  to  go  to  the  iVlbanian  Restaurant ;  if  you  wanted 
hair-cutting  or  a  shave,  to  the  Albanian  hairdresser; 
if  you  wanted  groceries,  to  one  of  the  two  Albanian 
grocers,  and  so  forth,  all  of  whom  had  relatives  in 
Scutari. 

So  ignorant  for  the  most  part  were  the  Montenegrins, 
that  they  even  believed  that  Scutari — the  Scodra  of 
the  Romans — was  founded  by  the  Serbs,  and  were 
furious  when  told  that  it  was  the  seat  of  a  Christian 
Bishop  at  least  two  hundred  years  before  the  pagan 
Serbs  entered  the  Balkan  Peninsula. 

Statements  of  the  most  absurd  kind  were  pahned 
off  in  the  form  of  interviews  on  journalists  who  were 
quite  new  to  the  land,  and  who  were  therefore,  as  is 
the   custom,   entrusted   at  a   critical   moment   with 

265 


266        THE  STKUGGLE  FOR  SCUTAEI 

supplying  reliable  information  about  it.  King  Nikola, 
in  one  of  these,  was  said — probably  with  truth — to 
have  asserted  that  the  churches  in  Scutari  were  old 
Serb  ones,  whereas  they  were  all  nineteenth  century 
— and  late  at  that — and  all,  except  one,  are  Roman 
Catholic. 

"  Scutari  was  torn  from  us  by  the  Turks  V  howled 
Montenegro.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  was  sold  to  the 
Venetians  in  1396  by  the  last  of  the  Balsha  Princes 
(whose  sympathies  were  certainly  not  Slav,  for  they 
made  alliance  with  the  Albanian  chieftains,  and 
together  with  them,  fought  Marko  Kralyevitch,  the 
great  Serb  hero).  And  from  the  Venetians  the 
Turks  took  it  almost  a  hundred  years  later,  in  1478. 
As  the  Petrovitch  Dynasty  did  not  come  into  being 
as  rulers,  till  two  centuries  later.  King  Nikola's  asser- 
tion in  the  same  interview  that  the  bones  of  his 
ancestors  rest  in  Scutari  seems — poetic  !  More  especi- 
ally as  he  bewailed  the  loss  of  the  Herzegovina  in  1908 
for  a  similar  reason. 

In  plain  fact  the  Serbs  ruled  Scutari  from  1050  to 
1080,  and  lost  it  to  Byzantium;  and  then  again  from 
1180  to  1360  it  was  included  by  the  Nemanjas  in  their 
Great  Servia.  Two  hundred  and  ten  years  in  all — 
against  all  time.  They  did  not  succeed  in  Slavizing 
it,  though  contemporary  record  shows  that  they 
strove  to  do  so  by  force,  and  they  left  no  trace 
behind.  Historically  England's  right  to  Calais  is 
better. 

Having  now  failed  to  take  the  town  by  storm,  they 
yowled  about  historic  rights.  They  wished  the 
Powers  to  allow  the  Serbs  to  take  it  for  them,  and  to 
make  them  a  present  of  it.     All  day  and  every  day 


WAR  267 

the  children  sang,  with  monotonous  iteration,  in  the 
streets : 

"  Hish,  hash,  hosh; 
Ours  is  Tarabosb. 
One,  two,  three. 
In  Scutari  are  we." 

The  population  quite  forgot  that  they  had  begun 
war  "  to  liberate  their  brother-Serbs '';  and  when  The 
Times  correspondent  adverted  to  this  fact  in  an 
article,  were  deeply  hurt. 

Unmindful  of  the  King's  original  proclamation, 
they  now  cried  that  Scutari  and  the  destruction  of 
Albania  had  been  their  object.  The  throne  of  Dushan 
at  Prizren  was  forgotten.  Scutari  was  to  be  their 
capital  —  Scutari,  an  almost  solid  Albanian  town, 
with  a  population  nearly  eight  times  that  of  Cettigne. 

Some  even  declared  that  no  such  things  as  Albanians 
existed.  All  were  Slavs,  who  out  of  ''  pure  cussed- 
ness "  had  elected  to  speak  Albanian  and  turned 
Catholic !  Kovachevitch  the  Professor  of  Nose- 
cutting,  declared  to  an  admiring  audience  that  he 
could  prove  it  by  anthropological  reasons.  "  The 
Albanians,''  said  he,  "  burn  the  yule-log.  This  is  a 
purely  Servian  custom,  therefore,"  etc.  "  On  the 
contrary,"  said  I,  "  the  yule-log  is  an  old  English 
custom.  And  your  favourite  St.  George  is  our  patron 
Saint.  It  is  evident  we  have  the  right  to  occupy 
Cettigne,  shut  your  schools,  and  force  you  all  to 
speak  English.  You  are  clearly  Slavized  English." 
The  Professor,  who  with  his  friends  had  agreed  that 
"  if  our  rule  is  strict  enough,  the  Albanian  tongue 
will  be  killed  in  a  year,"  was  speechless  with  wrath. 

A  few  were  more  humane.     An  artilleryman,  back 


268        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

on  a  few  days'  leave,  told  me  that  working  the  guns 
now  was  sickening.  ''  First  we  have  to  fire  a  shell 
into  the  Christian  quarter  to  frighten  the  people. 
Then  the  officer  watches  through  his  glass  which  way 
the  crowd  of  women  and  children  runs,  and  then  we 
have  to  fire  a  big  shell  into  the  middle  of  them.  I'm 
sick  of  shooting  at  women  and  children  !" 

Then  came  news  that  the  Powers,  after  endless 
squabbling,  had  decided  that  Scutari  should  be 
Albanian,  and  drawn  a  rough  and  most  unjust  and 
unfortunate  frontier,  by  which  the  two  gallant  tribes 
Hoti  and  Gruda,  which  had  borne  the  brunt  of  the 
fight  for  freedom  in  1911,  were  awarded  to  Monte- 
negro. Solid  Moslem  and  Albanian  districts,  such  as 
Gusinje  and  Djakova,  were  also  handed  over.  The 
tribe-lands  Montenegro  did  not  yet  dare  to  touch. 
In  Gusinje  and  Djakova  she  at  once  began  a  policy  of 
extermination.  The  full  details  I  only  learnt  later. 
At  the  time  I  was  informed  by  one  of  the  "  Press 
censors,"  but  "  not  for  transmission,"  that  numbers 
of  executions  were  going  on  in  Gusinje.  ''  Wholesale 
slaughter  of  all  who  resist  us  is  the  proper  course." 
The  Moslems  were  given  the  choice  of  baptism  or 
death,  and  large  numbers  of  men  were  martyred. 
The  women  were  driven  into  the  churches,  "  like 
sheep,"  and  baptized.  Those  who  objected  were 
violated  by  the  soldiers.  Moslem  villages  were  plun- 
dered and  burnt.  The  deep  snow  on  the  passes  pre- 
vented the  escape  of  any  burdened  with  a  family. 
Many  were  slaughtered.  An  Orthodox  Slav,  a  native 
of  the  district,  was  made  Governor,  and  allowed  to 
wreak  private  vengeance.  From  Djakova  came  even 
worse  reports.     The   Montenegrins  were  striving  to 


WAR  269 

forcibly  convert  both  Moslems  and  Catholics.  Padre 
Luigi  PaHtch,  the  plucky  little  Franciscan  I  had  met 
more  than  four  years  ago  in  Djakova,  refused  to  make 
the  sign  of  the  Cross  in  Orthodox  fashion  and  abjure 
his  faith,  and  was  stripped,  beaten,  and  finally 
bayoneted  to  death.  Nor  was  he  the  only  Catholic 
martyred.  Some  fled  to  the  mountains,  others  were 
terrorized  into  submitting  to  Orthodoxy.  Austria 
intervened  sharply.  Had  she  not  done  so,  in  the 
words  of  a  Catholic  refugee,  "  there  would  not  have 
been  a  Catholic  left  in  the  district."  The  Monte- 
negrin excuse  was  that  as  there  were  only  one  hundred 
Orthodox  families  in  all  Djakova  and  none  in  the 
immediate  neighbourhood,  they  were  forced  to  be 
severe,  or  they  would  have  been  hopelessly  out- 
numbered. The  guilt  of  handing  over  this  Albanian 
district  to  be  butchered,  rests  primarily  with  Russia. 

There  is  a  well-known  Montenegrin  ballad  which 
describes  how,  in  the  seventeenth  century,  the  Monte- 
negi'ins  on  one  Christmas  Eve  celebrated  "  peace  on 
earth  and  goodwill  to  men  "  by  massacring  every 
Moslem  in  their  land  who  would  not  consent  to 
baptism,  and  this  was  held  up  as  an  example  to  follow. 

Huge  Serb  reinforcements  were  now  said  to  be  on 
the  way,  and  Montenegro  declared  that  if  she  might 
not  hold  Scutari,  she  would  at  least,  with  Serb  guns, 
batter  it  to  the  ground.  Petar  Plamenatz  chuckled 
over  the  report  that  the  Scutarenes  were  starving, 
and  said:  "  The  more  starve  the  better  for  us."  I 
remembered  his  pious  horror  last  year,  when  he  assured 
me  of  the  incurable  barbarity  of  the  Turks. 

The  Albanian  residents  of  Podgoritza  were  in  a 
state  of  mental  torture  painful  to  witness.     Why  the 


270        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

Great  Powers,  having  spoken,  did  not  enforce  their 
words,  they  could  not  understand.  One  whom  I 
knew  well  called  me  in  mysteriously,  and  with  drawn 
blinds  showed  me  a  heap  of  fowls'  and  lambs'  bones. 
Taking  up  a  bladebone,  he  asked:  "  Did  you  ever  see 
the  like  of  that  before?  "  There  was  a  large  white 
opaque  spot  upon  it.  It  meant,  of  course,  he  said,  a 
death.  But  so  large  a  spot  as  this  was  unheard  of. 
It  must  mean  the  death  of  someone  very  great,  and 
its  position  indicated  that  it  would  occur  shortly. 
"  Heavens  !"  thought  I,  "  does  this  mean  they  will 
kill  King  Nikola  !" 

News  came  in,  to  my  deep  regret,  that  Yanina  had 
fallen,  and  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Greeks.  Its  loss 
was  reported  to  be  owing  to  the  treachery  of  a  certain 
Greek  at  Corfu  and  Ismail  Kemal,  who  had  advised 
the  population  not  to  rise — until  it  was  too  late,  and 
the  Greek  army  was  upon  them.  Immediately  after 
this  came  the  death  of  the  King  of  Greece.  The 
fulfilment  of  the  tale  of  the  bones  made  a  profound 
impression.  The  Montenegrins  persistently  believed 
the  murderer  to  have  been  instigated  by  the  Bulgars. 

I  went  up  to  Cettigne  to  be  near  tlie  headquarters 
of  news.  On  March  26  fell  Adrianople.  This  made 
the  Montenegrins  quite  mad.  They  alone,  though 
they  had  begun  the  first,  had  made  a  bloody  and 
miserable  failure.  The  banner,  the  band,  and  the 
white  charger  were  tired  of  promenading  from  one 
point  to  the  other  waiting  to  triumphantly  enter 
Scutari. 

The  Powers  prepared  a  collective  note,  but  Russia 
impeded  its  delivery  as  long  as  possible.  During  the 
delay  Montenegro  hoped  that  she  would  take  Scutari, 


WAR  271 

and  once  in,  keep  it.  If  Austria  objected,  the  com- 
bined Servian  and  Montenegrin  armies  would  take 
Vienna.  1  frequented  the  drink-shops,  and  tried  to 
help  make  a  peaceful  settlement,  by  telling  everyone 
that  it  was  a  waste  of  blood  and  money  to  persist  in 
their  folly.  And  a  loss  of  honour,  too.  They  replied 
that  the  King  and  Princes  had  already  promised  the 
best  houses  and  posts  in  Scutari  to  their  officers  and 
friends. 

On  Friday,  March  28,  at  three  o'clock,  the  collective 
note  was  handed  in.  Peace  was  to  be  made  at  once, 
and  the  Montenegrin  army  withdrawn.  Montenegro 
gave  no  reply,  and  at  dinner  at  the  hotel  young 
Tomanovitch,  the  King's  aide-de-camp,  asked  loudly: 
"  Have  you  heard  the  latest  joke  ?  The  Powers  have 
told  us  to  retire  from  Scutari."     But  no  one  responded. 

England  put  in  a  severe  protest  as  to  the  way  the 
civil  population  was  being  shelled.  The  British  Vice- 
Consul  was  wounded,  for  the  Montenegrins,  believing 
that  the  Consuls  were  urging  the  Scutarenes  to  resist, 
were  shelling  the  Consulates.  Every  one  of  them  was 
hit,  and  so  were  several  houses  near  them. 

I  went  down  to  Podgoritza,  and  found  the  people 
furious  against  England.  A  crowd  of  officials  at  the 
post-office  shouted  to  me:  "  We  will  take  Scutari  with. 
the  last  drop  of  our  blood,  and  then  avenge  ourselves 
on  Austria  by  marching  into  Bosnia."  "  How  can 
you  when  you've  shed  the  last  drop  of  your  blood  ?" 
I  asked;  and  it  made  them  madder  than  ever.  On 
my  return  journey  to  Cettigne  I  lunched  at  an  inn  at 
Rijeka,  and  heard  the  talk.  "  Servia's  plan  is  the 
best.  She  puts  all  these  gentlemen  (the  Albanians) 
to  the  sword.     She  has  cleaned  a  lot  of  land." 


272        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

On  April  2  Montenegro  replied  to  the  collective 
note,  and  refused  obedience.  Montenegro  was  in 
hysterics,  and  the  King  talked  of  "  setting  all  Europe 
in  a  blaze."  It  was  about  then  that  he  started  his 
operations  on  the  Vienna  Bourse.  By  causing  suc- 
cessive scares  over  Scutari  and  adroitly  buying  and 
selling,  he  was  currently  reported  to  have  made  a  very 
large  sum  before  the  Scutari  question  was  settled. 


THE   RESULT   OF  LIVING   NEAR   THE   BRITISH   CONStTLATE. 


Meanwhile  he  spread  official  reports  of  victories 
which  never  took  place,  about  "  five  out  of  the  eight 
forts  of  Tarabosh  have  been  taken,"  and  so  forth. 
In  reality  there  never  were  eight  forts.  And  what 
really  happened  that  day  was  that  the  Montenegrins 
lost  some  500  killed  and  wounded  over  taking  and 
losing  again  two  trenches. 

I  wrote  at  the  time:  ''  The  folly  and  conceit  of  these 
people  is   sickening.     All  the   foreign   Red   Crosses 


WAR  273 

ought  to  witlidi-aw,  and  cease  to  aid  and  abet  useless 
slaughter." 

On  April  5  the  combined  fleets  arrived  off  Antivari, 
and  Vice- Admiral  Burney  sent  a  note  to  the  Monte- 
negrin Government  ordering  the  cessation  of  hos- 
tilities. The  Serbs,  too,  were  ordered  to  withdraw. 
Some  of  their  reinforcements  had  arrived,  but  not  all. 
An  Italian  who  had  been  with  Martinovitch's  army 
described  a  heated  discussion  between  the  officers  as 
to  the  advisability  of  a  massacre  at  Scutari.  Many 
were  in  favour  of  it;  but  Martinovitch,  to  his  credit, 
was  opposed. 

On  the  11th  the  blockade  was  announced.  This 
effectually  prevented  more  Serbs  from  arriving.  They 
had  not  more  than  15,000  men,  and  would  not  risk 
another  defeat.  The  wounded  Serb  artillery  officer 
in  the  hospital  announced  angrily  that  he  had  official 
orders  that  the  Serbs  were  to  withdraw.  He  had 
been  displaying  Serb  humanity  by  shooting,  for  fun, 
a  little  pet  dog  which  happened  to  be  passing  the 
hospital.  1  was  not  sorry  that  he  was  to  have  no 
chance  of  practising  on  Albanian  children. 

The  Tsar  had  made  a  severe  and  most  uncompro- 
mising speech,  bidding  Montenegro  remember  that 
she  could  not  exist  without  Russian  support,  and  must 
clearly  understand  that  the  Scutari  episode  was  closed. 
The  Correspondence  bureau  telegi-am  which  contained 
this  was  not  put  up  till  late,  and  then  with  the  Russian 
note  snipped  out — a  most  childish  proceeding.  The 
Montenegrin  delegates  in  London  made  a  last  effort 
by  publishing  quite  monstrous  statements,  one  of 
which  was  that  there  were  26,000  Serbs  in  Scutari. 
We  asked  Ramadanovitch,  who  was  acting  as  Mini.>ter 

18 


274        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

of  Foreign  Affairs,  if  this  were  true.  "  Jamais  de  la 
vie  !"  he  replied.  "  Who  has  said  so  ?"  "  Popo- 
vitch."  "  Popovitch !  Mon  Dieu !  what  does  he 
know  ?     He  has  never  been  there  !" 

On  April  20  the  Montenegrins,  who  had  given  no 
answer  to  the  Powers'  note  sent  by  Admiral  Burney, 
announced  they  had  lost  the  papers,  and  could  they 
have  another  copy  ? 

In  a  long  talk  with  Jovitchevitch,  the  late  Consul 
in  Scutari,  he  expatiated  on  the  brutality  of  the 
Serbs,  asserted  that  in  the  Ljuma  tribe  they  had 
slaughtered  men,  women,  and  children,  and  that  I 
should  be  horrified  when  I  saw  the  destruction  they 
had  wrought  in  the  villages  round  Scutari.  On  the 
21st  early,  the  news  spread  that  a  boat  with  a  white 
flag  had  come  out  of  Scutari  the  night  before  to 
parley.  The  Montenegrin  frontier  was  at  once  closed, 
and,  contrary  to  all  international  law,  foreign  subjects 
were  forbidden  to  leave.  The  foreign  Ministers  were 
even  forbidden  to  send  cipher  telegrams  to  their 
Governments.  This  most  high-handed  and  quite 
illegal  proceeding,  caused  the  Austrian  military 
attache  to  start  at  once  in  his  motor  for  Cattaro.  At 
Nyegushi  the  motor  was  stopped  by  obstructions  on 
the  road.  He  proceeded  on  foot,  and  was  stopped  on 
the  frontier.  The  Legations  made  a  joint  protest 
against  these  outrageous  proceedings,  and  at  3  p.m. 
the  frontier  was  opened.  In  spite  of  all  these  pre- 
cautions more  than  one  correspondent  got  his  news 
through. 

News  from  Podgoritza  came  that  Moslems  from 
Gusinje  were  telling  piteous  tales  in  secret,  in  Moslem 
back  shops,  of  the  reign  of  terror  going  on  there  ;  that 


WAR  275 

Moslems  were  being  flogged  with  knotted  cords  and 
threatened  with  death  to  enforce  their  conversion  to 
Christianity.  One  man,  weeping  bitterly,  told  of  his 
forced  baptism,  and  of  how  the  fezzes  were  snatched 
from  the  Moslems'  heads,  and  they  were  forced  to 
wear  the  Montenegrin  cap  as  badge  of  their  sub- 
jection. The  Hoti  and  Gruda  men  had  long  since 
cast  away  those  given  them  at  the  beginning  of  the 
war.  They  had  now  just  learnt  that  Europe  had 
given  them  and  their  lands  to  Montenegro,  and  were 
in  a  fury  of  despair. 

If  the  fleet  had  but  landed  a  few  men  to  show 
Montenegro  that  the  Powers  were  in  earnest,  the  final 
catastrophe  might  have  been  spared.  They  could 
have  entered  Scutari,  and  taken  possession  of  it  in 
the  name  of  the  Powers,  and  Montenegro  would  never 
have  dared  fire  on  them.  But  there  they  stuck,  doing 
nothing,  and  Montenegro  believed  they  would  con- 
tinue to  do  nothing.  After  the  last  war  a  combined 
fleet  had  forced  the  cession  to  Montenegro  of  Dulcigno, 
a  wholly  Albanian  town,  much  against  the  wish  of  all 
its  inhabitants.  This  time  it  was  more  creditably 
employed  in  saving  one. 

But,  if  only  for  his  Stock  Exchange  transactions, 
Nikola  meant  to  get  inside  the  town.  I  was  anxious 
beyond  all  words  that  the  Powers  should  move.  The 
endless  day  dragged  on,  and  from  the  ominous 
silence  it  was  evident  that  some  hanky-panky  was 
going  on  behind  the  scenes. 

***** 

Crash  !  A  loud  report  woke  me.  "  Good  God  !" 
was  my  first  flash  of  consciousness,  "  they  have 
thrown  a  bomb  at  the  palace  !"     For  an  attempt  on 


276        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

the  King  was  not  impossible.  I  leapt  out  of  bed. 
"  Bom — bom — bom  !"  the  shots  dunned  out  a  salute 
from  the  hill  by  the  monastery.  Sick  in  my  soul,  I 
knew  that  Scutari  had  surrendered.  In  five  minutes 
everyone  was  in  the  streets.  It  was  2.15  a.m.  With 
a  desire  to  tell  someone,  I  telegraphed  the  news  to  the 
Manchester  Guardian,  and  returned  to  the  Palace.  A 
small  crowd — for  Cettigne  was  half  empty — gathered 
outside  the  Palace.  The  King  and  the  Princesses 
stood  on  the  balcony. 

The  crowd  even  at  this  moment  sang  "  Let  me  see 


— N.  ifTC ' 


king's  palace,  cettigne. 


Prizren  !"  Six  months  of  war  had  not  inspired  a 
song  about  Scutari.  Revolver  shooting  began,  and, 
with  shouting  and  singing,  went  on  till  daybreak. 
Sleep  was  impossible.  I  turned  out  at  6.30.  The 
streets  were  full  of  drunken  men,  revolver  in  one  hand 
and  brandy-bottle  in  t'other,  reehng,  firing  haphazard, 
and  making  vain  attempts  to  dance  the  kolo. 

The  fall  of  Scutari  was  a  knockdown  blow  to  me.  I 
had  hoped  to  the  last  that  the  Powers  would  play  up. 
All  they  did  now  was  to  announce  that  the  blockade 
was  extended  to  Durazzo.     The  Montenegrins  said: 


WAR  277 

"  How  funny  !"  In  order  to  gull  Europe  into  the 
belief  that  Scutari  had  been  finally  stormed  by  the 
victorious  Montenegrin  army,  official  "  news  "  was 
given  to  a  number  of  correspondents  that  there 
had  been  a  huge  battle,  and  that  several  thousand 
^lontenegrins  were  wounded.  In  truth,  not  a  shot 
was  fired.  Official  information  with  any  semblance 
of  truth  was  not  to  be  had. 

In  fact,  Scutari  was  in  sore  pHght.  People  were 
dying  at  the  rate  of  thirty  or  forty  a  day.  There  was 
little  for  the  soldiers,  who  had  been  reduced  to  one 
bread-biscuit  a  day,  and  several  battalions  had 
demanded  surrender.  The  Turks  had  almost  ex- 
hausted their  big-gun  ammunition,  and  the  Serb  guns 
were  now  in  position  to  batter  the  town  to  pieces. 

Peter  Plamenatz  drew  up  very  good  terms  for 
Essad  Pasha,  and  he  accepted  them.  Exactly  how 
good  they  were  we  shall  possibly  never  know.  That 
he  was  in  communication  with  Prince  Mirko  secretly 
for  some  time  previous,  has  leaked  out.  In  the 
published  terms  Essad  was  to  retii^e  at  once  with  all 
his  army  and  all  arms  except  the  big  guns,  and  as 
much  military  gear  as  he  could  carry.  The  Monte- 
negrins undertook  to  give  him  food  for  the  march, 
and  undertook  also  not  to  molest  the  civil  population, 
to  respect  their  religious  rights,  and  to  take  care  of 
the  wounded. 

Some  wag — it  was  said  to  be  Prince  Petar — dressed 
a  donkey  in  black,  labelled  it  *'  Neue  Freie  Presse," 
and  instructed  some  little  boys  to  drive  it  to  the 
Austrian  Legation. 

Everything  was  in  wild  confusion.  A  Te  Deum 
was  arranged — and  put  off.     I  walked  outside  the 


278         THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

town  to  avoid  meeting  any  of  the  Royal  Family,  for 
I  had  nothing  agreeable  to  say  to  them. 

In  the  late  afternoon  one  of  the  Crown  Princess's 
perianiks  brought  me  a  note.  Her  Royal  Highness 
had  greatly  admired  my  water-colour  sketches  — 
would  I  bring  them  round  that  afternoon  to  show  to 
the  rest  of  the  Royal  Family,  who  desired  to  see  them. 
I  felt  sorry  that  Her  Royal  Highness  should  have 
stooped  to  so  poor  a  trick  for  luring  me  to  an  inter- 
view ;  but  the  idea  that  on  the  morrow  of  the  fall  of 
Scutari  the  Montenegrin  Royal  Family  should  have 
been  suddenly  inspired  wdth  a  craving  to  inspect 
sketches  which  they  could  have  seen  at  any  previous 
time,  was  too  much  for  my  sense  of  humour. 

A  sense  of  humour  is,  after  all,  life's  chief  disinfect- 
ant. And  in  spite  of  the  sordid  circumstances,  it  was 
with  a  grin  that  I  extracted  the  sketches  from  the 
bottom  of  my  trunk,  and  gave  them  to  the  perianik 
with  a  note,  in  which  I  regretted  that,  owing  to  the 
fact  that  the  drawings  were  already  packed  up,  I  had 
had  to  keep  Her  Royal  Highness  waiting.  I  hope  the 
Royal  Family  enjoyed  them. 


s^k^^. 


TITE   CITADEL,    gCTTTARI. 


CHAPTER  XV 


SCUTARI 

The  fall  of  Scutari  had  a  mixed  effect  on  the  Foreign 
Legations  at  Cettigne.  France  and  Russia,  to  whose 
mlful  retarding  of  events,  King  Nikola's  coup  was 
undoubtedly  due,  rejoiced  openly. 

"  You  cannot,"  said  someone  to  me,  *'  get  over 
le  fait  accompli f"  "Except  by  accomplishing  an- 
other,'' said  I. 

Others  among  the  Ministers  were  furious,  and  all 
knew  that  it  entailed  arduous  and  responsible  work, 
and  were  proportionately  serious.  One  thing  only 
had  the  Powers  achieved.  They  had  by  their  very 
strong  representations  made  Montenegro  understand 
that  no  violence  must  take  place  in  Scutari.  Any- 
thing of  the  sort  would  mean  an  immediate  occupa- 
tion of  Cettigne  by  Austrian  troops  and  a  landing  of 
a  combined  force.  The  authorities  in  consequence 
allowed  only  their  more  civilized  battalions  to  take 
possession  of  the  town,  and  policed  it  largely  with 
Slav  volunteers  from  abroad. 

Prince  Danilo  entered  the  citadel  of  Scutari  on 
April  24,   hoisted   the   ^lontenegrin   flag  there,  and 

279 


280        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

received  the  keys  from  Essad,  who,  with  the  Turkish 
troops,  at  once  marched  off  to  Tirana.  But  no  state 
entry  into  town  was  made.  The  King  was  to  make 
this  later. 

On  the  25th,  with  Mr.  Loch  of  The  Times,  I  went  to 
Scutari,  greatly  anxious  as  to  the  state  of  my  friends. 
We  took  two  large  sacks  of  bread  and  several  cases  of 
other  food. 

Poor  Scutari,  that  I  had  left  nine  months  ago,  was  a 
miserable  sight.  The  people  were  half  dazed  with  terror 
and  starvation,  and  were  terrified  lest  they  should 
be  left  in  the  hands  of  Montenegro.  "  If  we  had  but 
known  help  was  near,"  said  many,  "  we  might  have 
held  out  a  day  or  two  longer.  We  heard  there 
were  ships,  but  day  after  day  passed  and  no  help 
came,  and  we  thought  they  must  be  Greek  or  Bulgar 
ships  with  more  troops."  The  populace  was,  in  fact, 
completely  in  the  dark  as  to  what  had  happened. 
The  Montenegrin  soldiers  had  already  begun  telling 
the  Catholics  that  they  would  soon  have  to  learn  to 
cross  themselves  properly. 

Shattered  houses  and  wounded  people  corroborated 
the  indignant  statements  of  the  Consuls  and  the 
Archbishop,  that  the  civil  population  had  been 
specially  selected  for  bombardment.  The  schools, 
churches,  hospitals,  and  Consulates  had  all  been 
aimed  at,  rather  than  the  citadel  or  barracks.  All 
had  been  struck,  and  some  wrecked.  It  was  im- 
possible that  all  should  have  been  hit  accidentally. 
The  British  Consulate  had  attracted  heavy  fire.  Not 
only  had  it  been  struck  and  Mr.  Summa  wounded,  but 
both  the  house  opposite  and  that  alongside  were 
completely  destroyed.     The  cathedral  was  a  wreck 


WAR 


281 


of  its  former  splendour — the  roof  riddled,  the  sacristy 
and  tower  burnt  out,  and  great  pits  blown  in  the  floor 
by  shells.  Forty — fifteen  of  which  were  of  the  largest 
calibre — w^ere  fired  at  it.  Nearly  two  thousand 
persons  had  been  refuged  in  it  with  all  their  goods, 


I 


rS'TERIOR    OF    SACRISTY    AFTER    BOMBARDMENT. 

believing  it  safe,  and  fled  in  panic.  Several  were 
wounded,  and  many  lost  all  their  gear  in  the  flames. 
The  convent,  too,  was  wrecked,  and  two  nuns  killed 
and  one  wounded. 

Poor  old  Marko  and  his  family  were  alive,  thanks  to 
the  Archbishop's  brother,  who  had  fed  them.     But 


282         THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

they  were  ill  and  shaky;  so  were  many  others.  In 
the  poorer  houses  they  lay  on  the  ground  in  the  last 
stages  of  misery.  Tortoises,  frogs,  hedgehogs,  dande- 
lions had  all  been  used  as  food.  During  the  last 
twenty-eight  days  few  rations  had  been  given  out. 
Many  had  eaten  more  or  less  poisonous  plants  (especi- 
ally the  very  acrid  root  of  a  kind  of  arum),  or  had 
tried  to  make  bread  with  linseed,  both  of  which  had 
caused  acute  diarrhoea.  I  saw  a  man  drop  and  die  in 
the  street,  and  I  fed  a  skeleton  child. 

The  Montenegrins  had  given  flour  to  the  heads  of 
the  Catholic  and  Moslem  communities,  and  this  was 
distributed  free  the  first  few  days.  People  waited 
in  long  lines  at  the  depots. 

So  far,  all  food-supplies  were  in  Montenegrin  hands, 
and  nothing  could  be  imported.  I  fed  all  my  friends 
and  neighbours  out  of  my  stock. 

Poor  old  Marko  was  in  despair.  His  orchard  had 
been  taken  over  by  the  Turkish  military  as  a  site  for 
barracks,  and  four  wooden  ones  had  been  erected. 
The  Bimbashi,  on  leaving,  gave  Marko  a  signed  letter, 
stating  that  all  things  left  in  his  orchard  were  his 
property,  to  compensate  for  the  damage  done. 

But  the  Montenegrin  troops  had  poured  in,  and 
when  I  arrived  were  looting  hard,  tearing  down  the 
barracks,  smashing  glass  and  tiles,  yelling  like  a  pack 
of  wild  beasts.  I  ordered  them  off,  and  as  they  re- 
fused to  obey,  went  straight  to  the  camp  and  com- 
plained to  the  officer  that  his  men  were  behaving 
worse  than  the  Turks,  and  making  a  very  bad  im- 
pression on  the  populace.  A  sentry  was  put  on,  but 
shortly  withdrawn.  Back  came  the  men  and  began 
again.     Poor  Marko,  afraid  to  speak,  was  almost  in 


WAR  283 

tears,  as  his  goods  disappeared.  I  sent  them  off  a 
second  time,  and  threatened  to  go  to  the  General 
about  it. 

Petar    Plamenatz    was    appointed    Governor    of 
Scutari,  and  arrived.     It  was  April  28.     The  Mon- 
tenegrin kavas  met  me  in  the  street  and  said  that 
Petar  wanted  to  see  me  at  once.     I  went  straight  to 
the  Montenegrin  Consulate,  where  he  was  established. 
"  I  fehcitate  you,"  said  I.      ''  During  the  war  you 
told    me    that    this    was    the  position  you  aspired 
to.     You  have  reached  it."     Petar  looked  harassed. 
"What!"    he    cried;   ''you — you   who    know    the 
difficulties  of  the  situation,  felicitate  me  ?"     ''  The 
greater  the  difficulties  the  greater  the  honour  if  you 
succeed,"   I   said.     "  Mon  Dieu  !  mon  Dieu !"  cried 
Petar,   "  what  can  I  do  ?      I  drew  up   all  Essad's 
terms — arranged  the  whole  terms  of  surrender.     I 
believed  it  would  be  the  crown  of  my  Hfe,  and  that  I 
should  be  able  to  retire  from  pubhc  life,  with  my 
career  honourably  terminated!"     Petar  being  well 
under  forty,  the  idea  of  his  career  being  terminated 
struck  me  as  funny.    I  threw  out  no  suggestions.    "  I 
have  sent  for  you,"  he  continued,  "  to  beg  your  help." 
("  The  devil  you  have,"  thought  I.)     "  I  beg  that 
you,  who  understand  these  people,  will  take  a  house 
here  and  remain  to  assist  me."     I  said  that  I  hoped 
to  stay  on  for  a  bit,  but  had  no  fixed  plans  as  yet. 
"  The  situation,"  said  Petar,  "  is  very  complicated." 
'*  Very,"  said  I.     "  What  would  you  advise  me  to  do 
about  the  Maltsori  ?"     "  Nothing,"  said  I.     "  Do  not 
interfere  with  them  in  any  way — unless  you  wish 
trouble.     They  all  hate  you."     "  I  am  of  that  opinion. 
We  are  agreed."     Then,  suddenly  and  passionately: 


284         THE  STEUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

"  You — you — you — a  little  word  from  you — only  a 
word — these  Maltsors  will  follow  you.     Speak  for  us 
a  word — one  little  word — I  beg  you — I  implore  you." 
A  whirl  of  recollection  buzzed  by  me.     For  the 
third  time  Montenegro  was  begging  me  to  pull  it  out 
of  a  hole.     Not  two  years  ago  I  had  been  called  upon 
to  help  Montenegro  to  drive  the  betrayed  Maltsors 
back  across  the   frontier.      Now   Petar   cringingly, 
abjectly  prayed  I  would  help  whistle  them  to  the 
Montenegrin  heel  again.     I  do  not  think  I  ever  felt 
such  a  contempt  for  any  living  being  as  I  did  for  Petar 
at  that  moment.     "  All  is  in  the  hands  of  the  Great 
Powers,"  I  said  (hoping  they  would  act  speedily). 
"  What  am  I  ?     I  can  do  nothing."     "  You  under- 
stand, of  course,"  said  Petar,  wincing  at  the  mention 
of  the  Powers,  "  that  we  have  taken  Scutari,  and  shall 
remain  here  ?"     "  Perfectly,"   I   replied.     "  I   have 
already  heard  it  frequently."     "  And  that  we  shall 
leave  the  very  last  drop  of  our  blood  here  rather  than 
retire."     "  Perfectly.     I  have  already  heard  this  for 
several    months."     Petar    winced    again.     ''  Can    I 
count  upon  your  assistance  ?"  he  asked.     "  Unless  I 
am  assured  that  exactly  similar  ju'stice  is  employed 
towards  Moslems,  Catholics,  and  Orthodox  alike,  you 
cannot.     It  is  a  point  upon  which  I  feel  very  strongly. 
So  far  during  the  war  I  have  seen  nothing  but  foul- 
ness, corruption,  and  cruelty.     You  are  probably  not 
aware    of    the    conduct    of    Stanko    Markovitch    at 

Podgoritza.     He  wished  to  starve "     "  Ah,  mon 

Dieu !  mon  Dieu !"  cried  Petar;  "you  can  have 
no  idea  how  I  regret  that.  Will  you  distrust  me 
because  of  the  conduct  of  a  beast,  an  anmial,  like 
Stanko  ?"     "I  have  heard  of  what  has  happened  in 


WAR  28e5 

other  places  also.  And  you  must  admit  that  Stanko 
is  the  Governor  of  the  largest  town  in  Montenegro. 
If  such  is  the  justice  of  a  large  town,  what  kind  of 
justice  is  to  be  expected  in  the  distant  parts  ?  I  have 
heard  enough  about  that."  Petar  was  desperate.  He 
opened  a  drawer  and  took  out  papers.  "  See,"  he 
said,  "you  yourself  shall  appoint  the  officials  here." 
He  asked  me  to  recommend  a  dragoman  who  could 
speak  Serb  and  Albanian.  They  were  very  scarce,  in 
spite  of  the  "  26,000  Slavs  "  reported  by  Popo\dtch. 
We  selected  two.  He  started  on  the  Judges.  There 
was  only  one  very  good  one  in  Montenegro,  according 
to  Petar.  We  appointed  him — on  paper.  "  You 
understand,"  said  Petar,  '"  that  we  shall  treat  with 
perfect  justice  all  those  who  are  on  our  side.  To  the 
others  we  shall  show  no  mercy."  "  Perfectly,  as  you 
have  been  doing  in  Djakova  already,"  I  said.  "  Have 
you  anything  to  suggest  ?"  he  asked.  "  It  would  be 
well,  I  think,  if  until  more  order  is  established,  the 
Capitulations  and  a  certain  amount  of  European 
control  should  be  in  force."     "  We  will  tolerate  no 

interference "   began  Petar.     "  It  is  not  worth 

chscussing,"  said  I,  "  since,  after  all,  all  is  in  the  hands 
of  the  Great  Powers."  Petar  made  one  more  effort. 
"  Have  you  anything  to  complain  of  in  the  way  of 
justice  now  ?"  ''  Certainly.  The  soldiers  are  looting 
old  Marko  like  wolves."  I  obtained  a  signed  order 
that  this  should  cease.  "  Had  I  permission,  too,  to 
cross  the  Drin  and  go  to  the  assistance  of  the  villages 
that  had  been  burnt  and  plundered  by  the  Serbs  ?" 
He  flew  into  a  passion.  ''  Xo  villages,"  he  declared, 
"  have  been  burnt  or  plundered  by  the  Serbs.  The 
Albanians  have  told  you  that  lie."     "  Jovan  Jovit- 


286        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

chevitcli,  lately  Consul  here,  told  me.  He  said  it 
was  a  scandal."  Petar  was  upset.  "  And  I  wish  to 
know  if  it  is  permitted  to  feed  the  sick  and  starving 
in  the  town,  or  will  they,  if  they  accept  help,  be 
threatened  with  hanging  or  imprisonment,  as  they 
were  at  Podgoritza  ?" 

He  knew  this  was  true,  and,  visibly  anxious,  said, 
parole  d'honneiir,  I  was  free  to  help  whom  I  pleased. 
He  was  plausible,  imploring,  defiant,  and  abject  in 
turn.  When  he  wound  up  with  the  remark, ''  Though 
the  task  is  difficult,  you  must  at  least  admit.  Mademoi- 
selle, that  in  all  Montenegro  I  am  the  only  man  truly 
capable  of  undertaking  it,"  I  almost  laughed  aloud. 
For  this  was  meant  for  a  hit  at  Louis  Voinovitch. 
I  undertook  to  assist  him  on  the  terms  of  strict 
justice — if  he  remained — and  said  "  Good-bye."  Nor, 
as  Fate  ordained,  did  I  ever  speak  with  him  again. 
The  most  remarkable  thing  in  the  interview  was, 
perhaps,  that  he  had  not  dared  to  deny  a  single  one 
of  my  charges. 

The  time  passed  as  a  sort  of  nightmare,  and  seemed 
endless.  No  news  was  admitted  to  the  town.  No 
letters  could  be  either  sent  or  received  safely  unless 
by  the  hands  of  some  correspondent  or  other  foreigner, 
coming  or  leaving.  Montenegro  meanwhile  worked 
feverishly  to  get  the  populace  somehow,  by  threat  or 
promise,  to  sign  papers  stating  that  they  wished  to 
belong  to  Montenegro.  The  people,  terrified,  knew 
not  what  to  do.  They  did  not  want  to  be  Montenegrin, 
but  the  ships  of  the  Powers  lay  inactive,  and  all  hope 
of  help  was  dying.  Perhaps  the  Powers  after  all 
were  yielding  to  the  fait  accompli.  The  Archbishop 
made  a   plucky  stand.     He  was  oftered  higher  re- 


WAR  287 

muneration  as  a  Montenegrin  subject  if  he  would  get 
the  Catholics  to  sign,  and  refused,  saying  that  such  a 
thing  must  not  be  said  in  his  palace.  More  than  one 
well-known  patriot  had  to  fly  by  night  and  lie  hid,  and 
escaped  only  just  in  time,  for  the  soldiers  came  to 
arrest  him  next  day  for  telling  people  "  not  to  sign,  and 
the  Powers  would  save  them."  Montenegro  made,  too, 
an  attempt  to  set  the  Moslems  against  the  Catholics. 
The  place  swarmed  with  spies.  No  one  dared  speak. 
I  busied  myself  wholly  with  relief  work.  Two  most 
able  assistants,  Miss  Buxton  and  Miss  Robertson — a 
trained  nurse — arrived.  Alone  I  could  not  have 
tackled  the  work.  The  Austrians  and  Italians  had 
each  a  relief  ship  waiting,  but  were  not  allowed  to  act 
till  the  political  situation  was  cleared.  I  obtained 
sacks  of  dried  beans  from  peasants  who  came  down 
from  the  mountains  which  war  had  not  touched. 
We  made  house-to-house  visits  all  the  morning,  feed- 
ing up  dying  people  with  the  condensed  milk  and  beef 
extract  I  had  brought;  and  held,  in  the  afternoon, 
an  out-patient  department  for  the  less  ill,  and  dealing 
out  rations  of  beans  and  rice  to  the  starving.  The 
weather  was  intensely  hot,  and  the  work  among  the 
stuffy,  dirty  hovels  and  crowds  of  people  very  ex- 
hausting. Crowds  of  soldiers  swarmed  into  the  town. 
The  drink  shops  were  crammed.  It  was  an  anxious 
time.  Tradesmen  began  to  complain  that  the  soldiers 
pilfered.  No  news  came.  I  met  Voivoda  Vukotitch, 
the  Queen's  brother,  on  the  Bojana  bridge.  "  How 
long  are  you  staying  here  ?"  he  asked.  "  I  am 
waiting  to  see  the  King's  State  entry,"  said  I.  He 
looked  uncomfortable.  "  Is  it  fixed  ?"  I  asked. 
"  No,"  said  he. 


288        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

I  felt  happier.  The  Powers  were  doing  something, 
at  any  rate.  And  on  May  3  General  Martinovitch, 
who  was  Military  Commandant,  hurried  off  to 
Cettigne.  We  struggled  on  with  our  mass  of  patients, 
the  greater  part  of  whom  revived  with  careful  feeding 
and  a  few  simple  di'ugs.  News  came  that  on  the  14th 
the  British  Admiral  and  representatives  of  all  the 
other  Powers  would  take  possession  of  the  town. 

It  w^as  too  good  to  be  true.  I  had  been  hoping  and 
fearing  for  Scutari  through  the  long  grey  winter 
months,  and  now  in  the  heat  of  early  summer  the 
hopeless  year  crawled  on  and  on.  I  dreaded  lest 
even  at  the  last  moment  the  Powers,  to  gain  some 
private  ends,  would  allow  this  population  to  be 
martyred  like  the  Djakovans  and  the  people  of 
Gusinje.  Wholesale  massacre  such  as  that  reported 
from  Prizren  and  near  Monastir  might  follow  later. 

At  the  very  last,  when  the  Montenegrins  knew  they 
must  leave,  they  took  a  mean  revenge.  The  town 
was  swarming  with  Montenegrin  women  as  well  as 
men,  and  it  is  they  who  are  beUeved  to  have  set  fire 
to  the  bazar.  This  is  always  closed  at  night,  and 
almost  all  tradesmen  return  home  to  the  town.  It 
was  patrolled  entirely  by  Montenegrin  soldiers.  Fire 
broke  out  at  three  points  at  once  a  little  after  mid- 
night, and  began,  moreover,  in  the  richest  part  of  the 
bazar.  Some  bazar-men  who  discovered  the  fire 
were  prevented  by  the  soldiers  from  giving  the  alarm 
till  it  was  well  alight.  It  was  then  impossible  to 
arrest  the  flames  till  quite  half  the  bazar  had  been 
destroyed.  I  went  to  see  what  was  happening.  The 
crowd  of  Montenegrins,  oflicers  and  all,  were  laughing 
— as  pleased  as  Punch.     The  shopkeepers  near  the 


WAH 


289 


fire  tried  vainly  to  save  their  goods,  the  gieater  part 
of  which  were  looted  by  the  Montenegrins.  As  the 
Montenegiins  boldly  denied  that  they  were  guilty, 
and  blamed  the  Austrians  among  other  people,  I 
made  inquiries  at  Plavnitza  and  at  Podgoritza,  and 
found  that  any  amount  of  loot  had  been  brought  in 
there,  and  that  people  were  boasting  of  it.  There 
could  be  no  doubt  of  Montenegro's  guilt.  Xo  such 
fire  had  taken  place  for  thirty  years,  and  it  was  the 
final  blow  which  criLshed  many  a  poor  Scutarene  who 


O^fJe^ 


EVlMlJ  !    ILL   liCEM   BAZAK. 


hoped,  with  reviving  trade,  to  make  up  for  the  losses 
of  the  war.  A  rumour  flew  through  the  town  that 
the  Montenegrins  meant  to  burn  tliat  too  next  night. 
But  this  I  did  not  believe  they  would  dare  do.  And 
on  May  14  they  began  early  to  trail  over  the  bridge 
and  out  of  the  town. 

It  was  a  beautiful  summer  day.  The  river  ghttered 
in  the  sun.  Down  by  the  bend,  the  launch  came  in 
sight.  Nearer  and  nearer.  The  populace  had  pie- 
pared  Albanian  banners  and  wished  to  strew  roses  at 

19 


290        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

Vice-Admiral  Burney's  feet,  but  were  forbidden,  to 
their  bitter  disappointment,  to  make  any  sign  of  joy 
at  all.  The  launch  passed  under  the  bridge  over 
which  the  retreating  Montenegrins  were  tramping. 
"  Look  at  those  great  fat  Englishmen,"  said  one, 
pointing  to  the  sailors.  "  I  wish  we  had  a  Govern- 
ment that  fed  us  like  that." 

The  launch  drew  alongside  the  ramshackle  Custom- 
house. The  Admirals  landed  along  a  plank,  were  met 
by  some  of  the  3Iontenegrin  authorities,  and  went  up 
to  the  town.  The  anguish  and  tension  of  six  long 
months  was  over.     Scutari  was  saved. 


PART   IV 

THE  HARVEST  OF  WAR 

"  Have  ye  fled  in  the  sickly  dawn,  before  it  was  yet  too  late. 
With  a  child  in  your  arms  new-born,  leaving  cripples  to  find 
their  fate  ? 
Our  altars  were  foul  with  blood  when  we  came  to  the  homes 
we'd  fled, 
Smelt  the  reek  of  oui'  kinsmen's  blood;  thanked  God  that  the 
dead  were  dead." — Aubrey  Herbert. 


CHAPTER  XVI 

THE   HARVEST   OF   WAR 

The  war  was  over.  There  are  people,  I  believe,  wlio 
still  imagine  that  war  brings  forth  fine  qualities.  To 
me  it  had  appeared  only  as  a  sort  of  X-ray,  which 
showed  up  pitilessly  all  that  is  most  base,  most  foul, 
and  most  bestial  in  human  nature.  The  very  few 
acts  of  kindness  or  generosity  which  I  had  witnessed 
were  those  of  kindly  individuals  whom  war  had  not 
corrupted  (they  would  have  been  equally  generous  in 
peace-time),  and  in  no  way  compensated  for  the  fact 
that  in  the  sacred  names  of  Liberty,  Civilization,  and 
Christianity,  the  ^lontenegrin  people,  blood-drunk, 
lust-drunk,  loot-drunk,  had  reverted  to  primitive 
savagery  —  and  in  so  doing  had  lost  the  very  small 
idea  of  discipline  they  had  acquired.  Judging  by 
their  talk,  they  proposed  to  live  in  future  as  a  maraud- 
ing army.  Never  fond  of  work,  they  declared  that 
they  had  conquered  enough  people  to  do  the  work  for 
them,  and  looked  forward  to  a  life  of  something  like 
slave-driving.     A  marked  result  of  war  was  the  com- 

293 


294        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

plete  manner  in  which  the  Royal  Princes  had  lost  their 
prestige.  Seldom,  perhaps,  in  the  history  have  three 
Princes  so  thrown  away  an  unique  chance  of  gaining 
fame  and  popularity.  Prince  Petar  stuck  pluckily 
to  the  camp  and  suffered  considerable  hardship. 
Of  his  two  elder  brothers,  the  less  said  the  better — if 
only  half  the  contemptuous  remarks  of  the  soldiers 
were  true. 

And  with  bitter  ingratitude  (for  with  all  his  faults 
King  Nikola  is  the  maker  of  Montenegro,  which 
without  him  would  never  have  obtained  so  much 
European  recognition)  the  pro-Serb  party  talked  openly 
of  speedy  union  with  Servia.  The  Petrovitch  family 
would  be  sent  to  join  the  Obrenovitches.  Some  went 
even  further  as  wipers  out  of  dynasties,  and  proposed 
to  assassinate  as  well,  King  Ferdinand,  and  construct 
the  Great  Servia  of  Dushan's  days.  It  was  poor 
stuff.  I  quote  it  only  to  illustrate  the  blood-lust 
raised  by  war. 

There  is  but  one  thing  more  terrible  than  war,  and 
that  is  the  time  that  follows  immediately  afterwards ; 
it  is  then  that  the  war's  innocent  victims — those  who 
have  escaped  sudden  and  merciful  death  by  shot  and 
shell — crawl  back  to  the  blackened  ruins  of  their 
homes  to  face  a  slow  and  cruel  death  from  cold  and 
starvation.  To  the  help  of  these  it  was  urgently 
necessary  to  go. 

Miss  Buxton  and  Miss  Robertson  took  over  the 
relief  work  in  the  town  until  the  arrival  of  the  Austro- 
Italian  relief  ships  made  further  work  there  on  our 
part  unnecessary,  and  I  started  to  ride  round  the 
country  districts. 

If  maize  could  be  sown  before  June  26,  there  was  yet 


THE  HARVEST  OF  WAR  295 

chance  of  a  harvest.  The  land  beyond  Drin,  wasted 
by  the  Serb  army,  was  my  first  care.  Jovitchevitch 
had  in  no  way  exaggerated  the  devastation.  Into  the 
details  of  each  ruined  district  I  will  not  enter.  Even 
misery  a  thousand  times  repeated  monotonously, 
becomes  boring. 

So  effectually  had  the  houses  been  destroyed  in 
many  places,  that  nothing  remained  but  a  heap  of 
stones,  and  re-roofing  was  impossible.  To  add  to  the 
difficulty,  the  invading  troops  had,  in  some  instances, 
felled  so  much  timber  for  winter  fuel  that  even  for  the 
building  of  hovels  there  was  scanty  material. 

Accompanied  by  local  headmen,  who  came  to  fetch 
me,  I  rode  to  each  miserable  district,  summoned  the 
heads  of  the  houses,  and  distributed,  in  cash,  a  sum  of 
money  with  which  to  buy  seed-corn  or  other  seed,  or 
a  sheep  or  two,  as  folk  thought  best.  The  season 
proved  a  better  one  than  usual,  and  all  whom  I  w^as 
able  to  help  in  time,  reaped  good  harvests.  Those 
who  sold  vegetables  to  the  international  forces  occupy- 
ing Scutari  did  good  trade. 

But  the  destruction  proved  to  be  far  more  widely 
spread  than  I  had  any  idea  of  to  begin  with.  Miser- 
able, half-starved  people  began  to  flock  in  with  im- 
ploring messages  that  I  would  go  farther  and  farther 
afield. 

Of  the  places  near  Scutari  the  most  wretched  was 
Drishti,  the  home  of  the  women  prisoners  at  Pod- 
goritza.  This  most  beautiful  and  rich  village,  once 
a  bower  of  silvery  olives,  was  a  blank  desolation.  Xot 
only  had  every  olive-tree  been  felled  for  fuel  by  the 
Montenegrins,  who  camped  hard  by,  but  even  the 
roots  had  been  stubbed  up.     The  neat  market-gardens 


296        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

with  their  ingenious  irrigation  system,  that  lay  along 
the  river- bank,  were  wiped  out  of  existence.  Half  the 
houses  were  burnt.  All  were  plundered.  And  when  I 
visited  the  place,  the  wretched  survivors  were  smitten 
with  smallpox,  and  thirteen  sick  persons  were  all 
crowded  in  one  cavern.  In  some  other  places  all  the 
fruit-trees  upon  which  the  people  depended  for  a  liveli- 
hood were  felled.  Places  that  I  had  known  well-to-do, 
with  fat  fields  of  maize  and  flocks  of  sheep  and  goats, 
where  the  peasants  had  had  plenty  to  eat  and  drink, 
and  fine  embroidered  clothes  and  silver  chains  to 
wear  on  a  feast  day,  were  desert  wastes,  almost  un- 
recognizable. 

Women  crouched  in  hovels  made  of  a  few  sticks 
leaned  against  the  ruined  walls  of  their  house,  and 
cooked  leaves  and  grass  for  the  children.  Many  were 
half  naked.  I  was  glad,  indeed,  that  I  had  saved  ten 
bales  of  the  clothing  sent  me  from  England,  and  only 
wished  they  had  been  a  thousand. 

Some  districts  were  so  large  it  took  me  three  days  of 
ten  or  twelve  hours  to  ride  round  them  and  assist 
them  and  return  to  Scutari.  In  all,  I  visited  near 
Scutari  some  1,022  burnt-out  families.  The  most 
piteous  thing  of  all  was  that  few  of  the  unhappy 
victims  had  any  idea  why  this  ruin  had  fallen  upon 
them.  Women  with  starving  children  would  ask: 
"  Why  did  the  Great  Kings  (the  Powers)  let  the 
soldiers  come  and  rob  us  and  kill  us  ?  We  were  doing 
no  harm.  And  they  took  our  goats,  and  our  sheep — 
everything,  everything.  And  when  my  husband 
tried  to  save  the  sheep,  they  shot  him.  Our  house  is 
burnt.  We  are  starving  on  the  highroad."  Why, 
indeed  ?     It  would  be  impossible  to  make  these  poor 


HlRNT    HorSE    AT    (iKIZHA. 


^^ 


jyf.Aj|iM*^^ 


HiKNT  or  I   Cim.iiKKN   A I   Skikk/.i. 


THE  HARVEST  OF  WAR  297 

creatures  understand  that  the  Great  Powers  were 
actually  priding  themselves  on  having  "  localized  the 
trouble."  "  Are  we  not  good  ?"  they  ask.  "  Our 
little  hands  have  not  torn  each  others  eyes.  We 
have  only  sat  round  and  watched  these  people  being 
slaughtered."  The  Moslem  women  of  Albania,  watch- 
ing their  childi'en  die  of  cold  and  hunger,  are  too 
ignorant  to  understand  the  noble  self-restraint  of  the 
Powers.  And  the  Powers  now  were  treating  Albania 
very  badly.  They  neither  appointed  any  Govern- 
ment nor  recognized  any  local  one,  and  people  knew 
not  to  whom  to  look.  They  were  for  the  most  part 
terrified  of  offending  Europe  by  recognizing  any 
native  as  head  of  Albania.  But  local  headmen  were 
keeping  excellent  order. 

The  patience  with  which  a  whole  people,  placed  in 
a  most  difficult  and  almost  unprecedented  position, 
went  on  with  their  daily  affairs  quietly  has  not  been 
sufficiently  recognized.  While  I  was  riding  about  the 
burnt  districts  I  was  always  unarmed,  was  frequently 
with  men  I  had  never  seen  before,  and  everyone  knew 
I  had  at  least  £T200  in  gold  in  the  bag  at  my  belt. 
Men  by  the  wayside  would  call  out  by  me:  "  Where 
are  you  taking  the  money  to-day  ?  Come  to  our 
village  next."  But  no  attempt  of  any  sort  was  ever 
made  either  to  take  it  from  me  or  to  force  me  to  change 
my  route.  I  often  wondered  whether  similar  sums 
could  be  safely  carried  through  England  supposing 
all  pohce  withdrawn  and  the  Government  entirely 
done  away  with. 

The  news  that  someone  was  giving  relief  near 
Scutari  spread,  and  from  districts  four  and  five  days 
distant  came  men  with  yet  more  horrible  accounts  of 


298        THE  STEUGGLE  FOE  SCUTAEI 

suffering.  These  were  from  Puka,  and  were  in  the  last 
stages  of  want.  One  man  I  recall  who  was  dressed 
only  in  a  couple  of  sacks.  Many  of  this  district  must 
have  died  of  want  in  the  following  winter,  as  funds  were 
not  forthcoming  to  help  them  adequately.  They 
were  the  victims  of  wanton  outrage.  The  misery  of 
the  homes  wrecked  actually  in  the  course  of  war,  was 
perhaps  a  necessary  consequence  of  that  noble  pas- 
time. The  misery  of  those  wrecked  in  vengeance 
when  war  was  over,  cannot  be  excused  on  these 
grounds. 

The  Servian  army,  when  ordered  to  evacuate, 
avenged  itself  most  cruelly  upon  some  of  the  unhappy 
districts  through  which  it  passed.  Puka  especially 
suffered.  At  Flet-Puka  the  people,  when  the  Serbs 
arrived  in  November,  1912,  offered  resistance  and 
lost  nine  men.  The  Serbs  forced  a  way  through,  and 
burnt  twenty  houses,  but  otherwise  did  no  damage. 
But  in  April,  when  they  returned  and  the  men  of  the 
village  were  away  in  the  mountains,  the  soldiers  fell 
on  the  helpless  inhabitants,  killed  fifty-two  persons, 
of  whom  the  majority  were  women  and  children,  and 
burnt  and  plundered  the  rest  of  the  houses. 

Miserable  people  from  Arzi  told  of  even  worse  things 
there.  When  passing  through  the  village  in  Novem- 
ber the  Serbs  had  merely  disarmed  the  people,  who  had 
not  resisted.  But  when  the  troops  returned  in  April, 
they  amused  themselves  by  bleeding  some  of  their 
defenceless  victims  to  death.  "  Not  quickly,  as  you 
do  sheep,  but  slowly.  They  made  little  cuts  on  the 
wrists  and  the  elbows  and  on  the  necks  so  that  they 
should  be  a  long  time  dying."  Some  women,  with 
hideous  and  vivid  pantomime,  described  the  manner 


THE  HARVEST  OF  WAR  299 

of  the  cuts  and  how  the  Serbs  had  danced  round  the 
dying  victims  and  imitated  tlieir  last  shudders. 
Told,  too,  how  an  entire  family  had  been  massacred, 
except  one  girl,  who  was  hidden  under  the  bodies  of 
the  others,  and  emerged,  blood-soaked.  The  four 
women  who  told  this  were  Moslem  widows,  whose 
husbands  had  been  killed.  I  fear  that  it  was  all  true, 
for  the  details  were  corroborated  by  others  from  the 
same  district.  A  Catholic  boy,  for  example,  told  with 
horror  of  the  slaughter.  We  asked,  "  Did  the  Serbs 
put  the  people  in  a  row  and  shoot  them  ?"  "  No,  no. 
Far  worse   than   that.      They  cut   them   here   and 

here "   He  pointed  to  the  spots  and  gave  the  same 

account  of  bleeding. 

Nor  were  the  Serbs  themselves  ashamed  of  their 
exploits,  for  a  Serb  officer  told  a  doctor  I  know,  that 
he  had  helped  to  bury  people  alive  in  Kosovo  vilayet. 
And  the  terror  which  the  people  had  of  the  Serbs  told 
a  tale  too.  Though  ordered  by  the  Powers  to 
evacuate,  the  Serbs  kept  a  considerable  force  in  Mir- 
dita,  and  several  guns  aimed  towards  the  Abbot's 
house  for  about  five  months  after  they  had  declared 
officially  that  they  had  withdrawn.  Nor  did  they 
take  any  notice  of  Vice-Admiral  Burney's  order  to 
go.  They  were  connected  by  outposts  and  by  tele- 
graph with  Prizren,  so  were  in  a  position  to  pour  in 
troops  at  any  moment,  which  caused  the  greatest 
anxiety  among  the  villagers. 

Other  victims  came,  survivors  of  ^Montenegrin  per- 
secution in  the  Gusinje  and  Djakova  districts.  In 
August  I  rode  close  up  to  this  frontier,  and  heard 
from  refugees,  accounts  which  abundantly  confirmed 
those  w^hich  the  Gusinje  men  in  April  in  fear  confided 


300        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

to  the  Moslem  shopmen  of  Podgoritza.  One  man 
can  lie;  three  or  four  can  arrange  to  tell  the  same 
tale.  But  when  widely  scattered  people  are  met  and 
questioned  quite  separately,  at  different  times  and  in 
different  places,  and  their  accounts  agree,  there  can 
be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  the  tale  contains  a  large 
proportion  of  truth,  even  when  the  exaggerations 
caused  by  terror  are  allowed  for. 

Briefly,  so  soon  as  the  Powers  drew  that  most  un- 
fortunate frontier  in  March  "  without  considering  the 
ethnographical  question,"  the  Montenegrins  began 
to  rearrange  that  question  to  suit  themselves.  "  When 
the  officer  Veshovitch  came  to  Gusinje  with  the  Mon- 
tenegrin soldiers,  he  said:  '  Do  not  be  afraid.  We 
have  come  to  set  you  free.  We  shall  not  hurt  you.' 
And  until  he  left  in  about  a  month's  time  all  was 
quiet.  Then  there  came  two  Brigadiers,  and  an 
Orthodox  of  Gusinje  was  made  Kapetan.  He  began 
a  search  for  arms.  Those  who  had  none — and  many 
were  unarmed — said  so  in  vain,  and  were  flogged  most 
terribly.  This  began  about  St.  Nikola  (in  December) . 
And  the  Montenegrins  began  shooting  people,  and 
robbing  them,  and  stealing  their  'cattle.  But  we 
still  hoped  things  would  be  better,  and  did  not  wish 
to  lose  our  lands;  and  there  was  deep  snow  on  the 
passes,  so  that  it  was  impossible  to  go  with  a  large 
family  of  children.  Then  the  Montenegrins  began 
to  go  against  our  religion.  This  was  in  March.  Four 
battalions  came  and  surrounded  the  whole  Gusinje 
district.  They  first  took  the  hodjas  and  asked, 
'  Will  you  be  baptized  V  and  when  a  man  said  '  No,' 
dan-dan  he  was  shot  dead.  Nearly  all  were  shot. 
Then  they  took  Bairam  Zechir,  a  headman,  and  150 


THE  HARVEST  OF  WAR  301 

others — all  Moslems  of  Gusinje,  Martinovitch,  and 
Plava,  and  the  neighbouring  villages — and  took  them 
away  as  prisoners,  and  on  the  way  shot  them  all  in 
Chafa  Previsit  (a  pass).  They  shut  all  our  mosques, 
and  put  guards  at  the  doors,  and  forbade  anyone  to 
pray  as  we  Moslems  do;  and  if  anyone  was  seen 
praying  through  a  window,  he  was  shot.  It  is  im- 
possible to  tell  the  misery  that  has  fallen  on  us. 
They  forbade  our  women  to  go  veiled,  and  tore  the 
veils  ofl'  them,  and  insulted  them.  Bairam  Zechir 
and  his  comrades  were  the  first  headmen  shot  for 
reUgion.  But  then  they  took  men  here  or  there, 
twenty  or  fifty  at  a  time,  and  shot  all  who  refused 
baptism."  The  number  of  persons  thus  shot  was 
variously  estimated.  The  lowest  figure  given  was 
500,  the  highest  about  600.  It  should  be  noted  that 
the  man  who  gave  500  had  succeeded  in  flying  from 
the  district  before  those  who  gave  a  higher  estimate. 
A  considerable  number,  when  they  saw  how  things 
were  going,  managed,  in  spite  of  the  snow,  to  escape 
to  the  mountains  of  Gashi  and  Krasnichi.  But  few 
who  had  large  families  could  do  so.  Some  men  left 
their  wives  and  childi-en — "  for  war  is  not  made  on 
women" — but  these  were  driven  to  church  "like 
sheep "  and  baptized.  The  remaining  population, 
seeing  it  was  a  case  of  death  or  baptism,  gave  way 
on  the  advice  of  a  hodja,  who  told  them  that  their 
hearts  would  remain  Moslem,  and  that  God  would 
pardon  them.  An  old  man  who  steadfastly  refused 
baptism  was  seized  by  the  soldiers,  who  forced  a  lump 
of  pork  in  liis  mouth,  and  bound  it  so  fast  with  a  hand- 
kerchief that  the  man  was  suffocated.  A  number  of 
women   were  outraged.      "  But   of   this,  '   said  one 


302        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

man,  "it  is  hard  for  us  to  speak.  It  is  such  a 
disgrace." 

"  At  Cherem,  a  Moslem  village,  very  bad  things 
were  done.  Three  men  from  this  village  had  turned 
'  komit,'  had  fled  to  the  mountains,  and  one  day  fired 
on  some  Montenegrin  soldiers.  They  did  not  try  to 
capture  the  assailants,  but  went  to  the  village  and 
captured  twenty-seven  innocent  persons,  and  shot 
them  all.  In  two  houses  every  male  was  killed.  The 
women  were  then  told  they  must  be  baptized.  They 
said: '  You  have  killed  our  men;  leave  us  our  religion.' 
The  soldiers  outraged  all,  both  girls  and  women,  and 
afterwards  they  were  all  forcibly  baptized.  In  four 
other  houses  the  women  were  all  burnt  in  the  houses 
after  the  men  were  shot.  This  was  all  in  revenge  for 
the  three  men  who  had  fired  on  the  soldiers.  All 
these  people  were  innocent." 

Persons  were  also  killed  slowly,  as  were  those  at 
Arzi  by  the  Serbs,  not  by  cuts,  but  by  a  multitude  of 
small  bayonet  thrusts  all  over,  till  they  died  of  loss 
of  blood.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  Ipek  and  Berani 
the  former  revolutionary  leader  Avro  Tsemovitch, 
the  half-drunk  hero  I  had  seen  at  Andriyevitza,  was 
reported  to  have  instigated  and  committed  horrible 
atrocities.  The  Albanian  mountains  were  full  of 
these  unhappy  Moslems,  and  the  tribes  of  Gashi  and 
Krasnichi  were  giving  them  food  and  shelter.  I 
could  do  but  little  to  aid  them,  as  my  fund  was  almost 
exhausted. 

As  for  Montenegrin  intolerance  of  Catholicism,  an 
eyewitness  described  to  me  the  plundering  of  the 
church  of  Mazreku.  The  order  was  given  by  one  of 
the  Royal  Family  of  Petrovitch.     In  spite  of  the 


THE  HARVEST  OF  WAR  303 

priest's  remonstrances,  Montenegrins,  both  men  and 
women,  struggled  to  get  a  bit  of  something  out  of  the 
church.  The  crucifix  and  tabernacle  were  taken,  the 
missal  destroyed,  and  private  houses  were  entered 
and  robbed  of  their  pictures  and  images  of  saints. 

Not  satisfied  with  their  attack  on  the  Moslems  in 
March,  the  Montenegrins,  while  I  was  still  in  the 
mountains  in  August,  fell  on  the  Moslem  village  of 
Vuthaj.  I  was  waked  early  on  the  21st  by  a  man 
just  in,  with  the  news  that  the  soldiers  had  attacked 
the  village  before  dawn,  broken  in  the  doors,  seized 
the  sleeping  inmates,  and  driven  out  many  with 
bayonets,  and  either  shot  or  bayoneted  them  on  the 
road.  He  himself  had  seen  eight  bodies,  full  of 
bayonet  wounds,  and  had  fled  to  save  his  life.  Most 
of  the  survivors  fled  to  the  Albanian  mountains. 
Their  property  was  some  of  the  most  fertile  land  in 
the  district,  and  for  this  reason  they  were  raided. 

Among  Balkan  subjects,  Ferdinand  of  Bulgaria 
was  the  only  one  who  spoke  the  truth  in  his  proclama- 
tion of  war.  It  was,  he  said,  to  be  a  war  of  Cross 
against  Crescent.  The  massacres  of  Adana  and  the 
resultant  misery  pale,  before  the  scarlet  horrors  com- 
mitted wholesale  in  cold  blood  by  the  so-called  fol- 
lowers of  Christ.  The  Orthodox  Church,  with  her 
Jewish  pogroms  in  Russia  and  her  Balkan  exploits, 
now  holds  the  world's  record  for  religious  savagery. 

The  Montenegrins,  I  learnt  later,  had  pursued  a 
similar  pohcy  after  the  war  of  1877.  The  Moslems 
were  then  forcibly  expelled  from  Podgoritza,  and 
their  houses  in  the  old  town  burnt,  as  well  as  the 
bazar.  When  riding  round  on  relief  work,  I  came 
across  a  district,  Buza  Ujit,  entirely  peopled  by  refu- 


304        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

gees,  who  had  then  fled  from  Podgoritza,  and  their 
descendants.  The  Catholic  Maltsors,  their  neigh- 
bours, had,  however,  come  at  the  beginning  of  the 
war,  and  occupied  their  houses  for  them,  so  they  told 
me,  and  had  cried  to  "  i  biri  Kralit "  (the  King's  son) 
to  spare  them.  As  Montenegro  then  still  wished  to 
be  on  good  terms  with  the  Maltsors,  the  Buza  Ujit 
people  were  thus  saved  from  a  second  time  experi- 
encing ]\Iontenegrin  methods. 

When  I  had  heard  the  horrors  of  the  Gusinje  dis- 
trict, I  found  that  there  were  about  a  thousand 
refugees  from  the  Djakova  district,  where  similar 
horrors  were  being  enacted.  Great  misery,  too,  was 
and  is  caused  by  the  frontier-line,  drawn  "  without 
considering  the  ethnographic  question."  It  has  been 
drawn  between  large  districts  and  their  only  market- 
town,  the  learned  frontier- drawers  having,  it  appears, 
forgotten  that  a  town  and  its  surroundings  necessarily 
form  an  organic  whole,  and  are  interdependent.  By 
giving  Djakova  to  the  Montenegrins,  the  whole  of  the 
Nikaj,  Merturi,  Gashi,  Krasnichi,  Tropopoja  tribes, 
and  parts  of  Puka,  are  deprived  of  any  place  where 
they  can  either  buy  or  sell.  Djakova  was  founded  by 
emigrants  from  Merturi  and  Berisha,  and  never  was 
a  Serb  town.  The  luckless  mountain  men,  when  war 
was  over,  tried  to  go  as  usual  to  market.  Some  were 
flogged,  and  others  shot.  A  four  or  five  days'  tramp 
to  Scutari  is  their  only  alternative.  The  Serbs 
were  supposed  by  Europe  to  have  performed  an 
heroic  feat  when  they  marched  over  these  same  moun- 
tains in  the  winter.  The  Powers  have  condemned 
the  unhappy  peasants  to  make  a  similar  march  when- 
ever they  wish  to  buy  some  maize  or  lamp-oil. 


THE  HARVEST  OF  WAR  305 

Moreover,  Montenegro  is  so  sparsely  populated  that 
she  has  not  people  enough  of  her  own  to  populate 
these  regions  which  she  has  devastated.  Djakova, 
Ipek,  Plevlje,  and  Bijelopolje,  have  been  awarded  to 
her,  each  one  bigger  than — in  some  cases  twice  or  thrice 
as  big  as — her  capital  Cettigne;  and  the  small  towns 
of  Berani,  Gusinje,  and  Plava  as  well.  So  much  for 
the  results  of  war  in  the  north. 

In  June,  I  made  a  journey  on  the  Houyhnhnm  down 
south,  through  Alessio,  Delbinishti,  Durazzo,  Pekin, 
Elbasan,  Struga,  Ochrida,  Pogradech,  Kortcha,  Berat, 
Fieri,  and  Avlona,  and  thence  returned  by  boat  to 
Scutari.  Of  this  journey  it  is  not  my  purpose  to 
speak  much;  space  forbids,  and  much  of  it  belongs 
rather  to  the  new  era  than  to  the  old  one.  It  con- 
firmed, were  more  confirmation  needed,  the  misconduct 
of  the  invading  armies ;  for  only  in  those  parts  which 
no  foe  had  penetrated  were  there  no  tales  of  outrage. 
The  whole  land  was  in  a  state  of  suspense,  awaiting 
the  help  of  Europe,  and  praying  for  the  speedy  arrival 
of  a  Prince  who  should  put  a  stop  to  the  intrigues, 
inspired  largely  from  abroad,  which  threatened  them. 
The  greatest  distrust  was  felt  for  Essad  Pasha.  He 
alone  was  possessed  of  artillery  and  an  armed  force, 
and,  it  was  feared,  would  make  an  attempt  to  gain 
power  for  himself.  It  was  rumoured  also  that  he  was 
receiving  money  from  abroad. 

Tranquillity  reigned  everywhere,  and  the  local 
governors  were  administering  primitive  and  effective 
justice.  One  picture  is  burnt  into  my  memory. 
It  was  the  passing  of  the  Turk.  Through  Durazzo, 
as  the  sun  was  setting,  came  a  miserable  little  pro- 
cession.    Pallid  men  in  khaki  rags,  their  bare  feet 

20 


306        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

dangling  limp,  clung  to  the  saddle-bow,  and  sat  with 
pain  the  lean  horses  that  bore  them.  Others,  a  shade 
less  ill,  limped  after  on  foot.  It  was  the  last  dying  rem- 
nant of  the  Turkish  army.  The  transport  which  was 
to  fetch  them  had  not  arrived,  and  as  the  light  died 
away  they  went  out  to  pass  the  night  on  the  bare 
ground  by  the  shore.  If  the  Turk  had  abused  his 
power,  he  had  paid  for  it.  I  shall  never  see  anything 
more  tragic  than  the  dumb  misery  of  those  few  sur- 
vivors of  a  military  Power  which  had  once  made  all 
Europe  tremble. 

Ochrida  in  the  hands  of  the  Serbs  was  another 

tragic  sight.     I  had  known  it  well,  ten  years  ago, 

when  I  first  did  hospital  work  for  the  wounded,  and 

more  than  half  expected  to  meet  my  own  ghost  as  I 

walked  through  the  melancholy  streets.     Then  the 

Bulgars  had  just  been  crushed  after  a  most  fierce 

insurrection;  but  they  did  not  look  half  so  hopeless 

and  sad  then  as  now,  when  they  had  been  "  freed  " 

by  the  Serbs.     They  had  given  their  blood  and  goods 

in  the  hope  of  union,   not  with  Servia,   but  with 

Bulgaria.     Some  few  who  recognized  me  said  there 

was  more  misery  than  ever.     The  once  busy  Moslem 

bazar  was  largely  closed.     What  had  become  of  the 

large  Moslem  population,  nearly  all  Albanian,  I  do 

not    know.     The    Bulgar    school    was    closed.     The 

streets,  newly  inscribed  with  the  names  of  Serb  heroes, 

were  silent  except  for  the  Serb  troops  which  pervaded 

them. 

Rumours  of  the  second,  and  most  disgraceful,  Balkan 
war  filled  officers  and  men  with  excitement.  Not 
satiated  with  Albanian  blood,  they  thirsted  for  that 
of  their  allies. 


THE  HARVEST  OF  WAR  307 

At  Pogradech,  a  little  Albanian  town  at  the  foot  of 
the  lake,  all  the  shops  were  shut  in  order  to  celebrate 
the  anniversary  of  Kosovo,  which  did  not  interest  the 
Albanians  at  all.  They  asked  when  the  Serbs  were 
going,  and  begged  for  union  with  Albania,  but  were 
cautious  of  speaking.  When  leaving,  I  went  to  the 
han  to  pay  for  my  horse- forage,  and,  as  change,  was 
offered  Serb  coins.  "  Do  not  give  me  Serb  money," 
said  I,  for  I  was  going  into  Greek-held  territory.  In 
an  instant  popular  feeling  blazed.  ''  Ha  !  she  won't 
have  anything  Serb  !  Bravo  !  bravo !"  I  was 
alarmed  lest  trouble  should  arise,  but  the  company 
was  solid  Albanian. 

When  I  was  in  Kortcha  its  fate  was  still  undecided 
by  the  Conference  in  London.  It  was  a-bristle  with 
Greek  soldiers,  and  there  were  freshly  painted  Greek 
inscriptions  all  over  the  town.  It  was  in  Kortcha, 
ten  years  ago,  that  I  had  first  been  inspired  to  help 
the  Albanian  people  to  become  a  nation,  by  the  enthu- 
siasm of  the  patriots  whose  acquaintance  I  made 
there.  From  Kortcha,  too,  during  the  Young  Turk 
reorime,  and  before  it  had  started  forcible  Ottoman- 
izing,  I  had  received  Albanian  papers  and  joyous 
reports  of  the  way  pupils  were  flocking  to  learn  in 
the  Albanian  school.  Now  things  were  very  different. 
A  curiously  interesting  light  was  thrown  on  the  way 
in  which  political  movements  are  worked  and  dust 
thrown  in  the  eyes  of  Europe.  On  entering  the  town, 
the  Greeks  had  at  once  ordered  that  Greek  and  not 
Albanian  should  be  spoken,  and  exiled  or  imprisoned 
many  who  had  the  courage  to  declare  themselves 
Albanian.  There  were  some  6.000  soldiers  in  the 
town,  and   the   population    was   helpless.      While   I 


308        THE  STRUGGLE  FOE  SCUTARI 

was  there  a  "  National  Meeting  "  was  got  up  by  the 
Greeks.  The  bazar  was  closed;  the  Greek  priests 
made  house-to-house  visits,  ordering  all  persons  to 
attend.  The  women  and  children  were  even  bribed 
to  do  so  by  being  told  that  some  English  people  had 
come  to  speak  to  them — a  statement  which  can  only 
be  described  as  a  shameless  lie.  Neither  I  nor  my 
companion  had  any  intention  of  speaking  at  a  political 
meeting.  Nor,  in  spite  of  this  attraction,  did  a  very 
large  number  of  persons  attend;  but  the  Conference 
of  Ambassadors  in  London  was  informed  that  the 
whole  population  of  Kortcha  wished  for  Greek  rule. 
In  that  case  one  wondered  why  they  had  not  got  up 
a  mass  meeting  themselves,  without  the  help  of  Greek 
soldiers  at  the  street  corners  to  point  the  way,  and 
priests  to  tell  them  what  to  say.  Many  small  towns 
all  over  the  world  could  doubtless  be  made  to  say 
they  wished  to  be  Zulus,  if  an  overpoweringly  large 
force  of  that  race  were  in  occupation,  and  no  help 
at  hand.  The  very  large  majority  of  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  district  were  Moslem,  and  had  no  desire 
to  become  Greek  subjects.  The  whole  thing  was  so 
obviously  a  "put-up  job"  that  it' weakened  such 
sympathy  as  I  had  for  the  Greeks,  and  filled  me  with 
a  certain  contempt  that  they  should  have  stage- 
managed  it  so  badly.  A  number  of  persons,  on 
the  other  hand,  sent  messages  to  us,  and  said  they 
did  not  desire  to  become  Greek  subjects.  As  in 
Montenegro,  so  here,  the  desire  of  the  conqueror  was 
to  exterminate  or  drive  out  the  Albanian  population, 
especially  the  Moslem  portion. 

At  Moskopol,  a  small  Vlah  town,  on  the  return 
journey,  Greek  efforts  were  highly  comical.    A  number 


THE  HARVEST  OF  WAR 


309 


of  persons  were  sent  up  overnight  and  instructed  how 
to  act.  On  our  arrival,  they  rang  the  church  bells 
and  came  prancing  out  to  welcome  us  "  to  a  Greek 
town."  It  was  exactly  like  the  scene  of  "  peasants 
rejoicing  "  when  the  curtain  goes  up  at  a  comic 
opera,  and  terribly  overacted. 

If  the  Powers,  to  gain  some  private  ends  of  their 
own,  do  not  force  the  Greeks  to  evacuate,  they  will 
sign  the  death-warrants  of  a  large  proportion  of  the 
population. 

To  arrive  at  Berat,  a  free  Albanian  town,  after  all 


GOVERNMENT  HOUSE,  AVLONA. 


this  was  like  coming  up  for  a  breath  of  fresh  air. 
Berat,  gay,  jolly,  and  full  of  life,  was  crowded  with 
pack-animals  and  peasants  come  to  market.  The 
contrast  between  it  and  Greek-ridden  Kortcha  was 
most  marked.  Berat's  one  anxiety  was  that  Europe 
should  send  a  Prince  quickly  who  should  protect 
Albania  from  further  aggression. 

Avlona  was  full  of  refugee  Moslems  who  had  fled 
from  Greek  persecution.  They  reported  much  pil- 
laging and  cruelty.  Avlona  was  then  still  the  seat  of 
Ismail  Kemal's  temporary  government,  but  Avlona, 
like  Berat,  begged  for  the   Prince  to  come  quickly. 


310        THE  STRUGGLE  FOB  SCUTARI 

There  were  signs  that  Essad,  jealous  of  power,  would 
shortly  begin  to  make  trouble,  and  the  long-drawn 
delay  of  the  Powers  to  fulfil  their  promises  was 
causing  deep  anxiety. 

The  international  forces  were  not  allowed  jurisdic- 
tion beyond  ten  kilometres  from  Scutari,  and  the 
people  knew  not  whom  to  obey.  Had  the  Powers 
allowed  the  international  troops  to  each  occupy 
separate  districts  and  rule  till  the  Prince's  arrival, 
much  difficulty  and  trouble  might  have  been  spared. 
Instead,  almost  a  year  was  allowed  to  pass  between 
the  Powers'  decision  to  create  a  fresh  Albania  and 
their  recognizing  a  ruler  of  it ;  and  time  was  given  for 
the  plans  of  rival  chiefs  and  of  the  most  interested  of 
the  Powers  themselves  to  be  matured. 


t: 


CHAPTER  XVII 

LAST    WORDS 

I  RETURNED  to  Scutai i  ill  July,  and  worked  till  the 
middle  of  September,  struggling  to  enable  some,  at 
least,  of  the  war  victims  to  face  the  coming  winter. 
The  distress  was  more  widely  spread  than  I  had 
imagined.  It  was  now  too  late  to  sow,  and  I  had 
almost  no  money.  This  the  poor  people  could  not 
believe,  and  the  scenes  which  ensued  were  indescrib- 
ably painful. 

I  sent  messages  in  vain  up-rountry  saying  that  no 
more  help  could  be  given.  Women  whose  starved 
breasts  had  no  more  milk  for  the  shrivelled  baby 
came  and  threw  themselves  at  my  feet,  and  wept  and 
cried:  "  If  you  will  not  help  me,  throw  my  children 
into  the  river;  I  cannot  see  them  starve."  I  remem- 
bered Petar  Plamenatz  saying  with  a  grin:  "  The 
more  starve,  the  better  for  us  !" 

I  prepared  to  leave  the  country,  as  I  could  do  no 
more,  believing  that  though  in  outlying  districts 
there  would  be  deaths  from  starvation,  yet  our  fund 
had  saved  a  considerable  number.  And  1  hoped  that 
England  would  send  money  to  rescue  others.  The 
need  was  great,  but  not  unconquerable. 

Then  came  the  final  catastrophe.  The  Serb  troops, 
when  withdrawing   from    Albanian    territory  in    the 

311 


312        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

neigtboiirhood  of  the  Debra  frontier,  looted,  as  they 
went,  the  horses  and  flocks.  The  owners  resisted, 
and  were  shot,  and  forty-two  headmen  were  taken 
prisoner  to  Debra.  The  Serb  force  was  small.  The 
whole  population  rose  in  a  body,  and  though  a  number 
were  armed  only  with  sticks,  hatchets,  and  similarly 
primitive  weapons,  they  drove  the  Serbs  from  the 
place  and  rescued  the  prisoners,  all  of  whom  were 
bound  and  condemned  to  death,  but  as  yet  only  a 
few  killed. 

Ignorant  of  European  politics,  the  luckless  people 
hoped  that  the  frontier  would  be  redrawn  and 
their  town  given  back  to  them;  but  a  large  Serb 
force  poured  down  upon  them  and  took  terrible 
vengeance. 

I  received  an  urgent  telegram  to  hurry  to  Elbasan 
at  once  with  "  first-aid  "  material.  As  the  fund  was 
exhausted,  this  was  not  easy.  The  Italian  Consulate, 
however,  gave  me  three  cases  of  material,  and  I 
started.  Three  and  a  half  days  took  me  to  Elbasan 
via  Tirana;  but  on  the  way  I  already  met  with 
refugees. 

Next  morning,  even  before  the  dawn,  they  were 
streaming  into  the  town,  and  I  watched  them  with 
dull  dismay.  Hundreds  of  women,  dragging  little 
children,  and  bent  under  the  bundles  of  bedding  they 
carried,  filed  in.  There  were  some  Gypsies  and  some 
Bulgarians,  but  the  bulk  were  Moslem  Albanians. 
The  men,  fine  specimens  of  humanity,  bore  themselves 
bravely  even  in  their  misery  as  they  tramped  by. 
Almost  all  were  unarmed.  I  remember  a  woman 
who  showed  her  cut  feet.  She  had  tramped  with  her 
three  children  from  the  Gostivar  district  near  Uskub. 


THE  irAKVKST  OF  AVAR  313 

It  liad  taken  six  days — "  The  children  went  so 
slowly." 

All  told  the  same  tale.  Their  villages  had  been 
set  on  and  burnt  by  the  Serb  troops  who  were  on  the 
way  to  Debra.  1  was  Ejiven  the  particulars  of  twenty- 
seven  villages  in  all.  In  some  iastances  the  troops 
had  set  fire  to  the  village  and  surrounded  it,  and 
driven  back  with  the  bayonet  those  who  had  not  had 
time  to  escape.  In  making  such  inquiries,  one  mu.st 
always  allow  for  the  exaggeration  which  is  inevitable 
when  people  are  terror-stricken  and  have  tied  for 
their  lives,  and  must  always  hope  that  some  of  those 
reported  slain  wmII  have  survived;  but  even  if  the 
tale  of  horror  were  divided  by  ten,  it  left  an  awful 
record  of  '*  what  man  has  done  to  man."  Moreover, 
on  my  return  journey  I  met  a  mass  of  people  at 
Tirana  who  had  fled  from  the  same  districts,  and  they, 
separately  questioned,  gave  almost  precisely  similar 
accounts.  Nor  when  the  old  hodja  of  Rechan  broke 
down  and  wept,  when  he  told  that  he  was  one  of  five 
men  who  had  escaped  alive  out  of  eighty,  and  that  he 
had  heard  the  shrieks  of  the  women  burning  in  the 
hoases,  could  one  doubt  that  he  was  speaking  the 
truth. 

In  the  face  of  all  this  misery,  1  was  helple-s.  The 
local  authorities  allotted  some  money  for  relief  work, 
and  formed  a  committee.  All  the  money  that  I  had 
with  me  I  had  already  spent  on  the  refugees  at 
Elbasan.  I  rode  away  from  the  siirht  of  nii^ory  which 
1  could  not  aid. 

In  Scutari  I  was  met  with  more  bad  news.  The 
Serbs  and  Montenegrins  had  cros-sed  the  Albanian 
frontier,  an«l  had  entirely  burnt  all  the  houses  of  the 


a=: 


314        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

Gashi  and  Krasnichi  tribes.  This  was  in  vengeance 
for  the  fact  that  these  tribes  had  been  sheltering  and 
feeding  the  wretched  refugees  from  Gusinje  and  Dja- 
kova.  Moreover,  a  number  of  Moslem  villages  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Prizren  and  Djakova  had  also 
been  burnt;  horrible  outrages  were  reported  by  the 
survivors.  In  one  village  the  girls  had  first  been 
captured  and  handed  over  to  the  lust  of  the  soldiery, 
and  afterwards  thrown  into  the  burning  village. 
Such  was  the  account  of  the  refugees. 

From  places  four  days'  march  away  came  hapless 
creatures  to  beg  aid.  I  remember  a  man  who  came 
with  his  wife  and  three  boys  from  a  village  in  the 
Prizren  district.  He  told  that  all  had  been  quiet 
there ;  it  was  far  from  the  trouble  at  Debra.  Someone 
brought  word  that  the  Serb  army  was  approaching. 
*'  I  said  to  my  brother,  '  Let  us  fly,'  for  I  knew  what 
the  Serb  soldiers  were  like.  He  had  a  little  shop,  and 
said:  *  No;  why  should  we  ?  We  have  done  nothing.' 
But  I  was  afraid,  and  took  my  wife,  and  my  two  boys, 
and  his  boy,  and  went  up  the  mountain.  Soon  we 
saw  our  village  burning.  The  people  who  escaped 
told  me  my  brother  was  dead.  I  did  not  know  where 
to  turn  for  help.  I  heard  of  you.  I  am  ashamed  to 
beg;  I  did  not  think  I  should  ever  have  to  do  it,  for 
I  have  always  given  hospitality."  His  wife  burst  into 
tears  when  I  said  I  could  only  give  food  for  a  day  or 
two. 

I  left  Scutari  and  returned  to  England  after  three 
years  and  six  months'  absence.  But  the  tale  of 
misery  has  gone  on,  and  the  agents  who  are  struggling 
with  it  have  been  unable,  through  lack  of  funds,  to 
lelieve  more  than  a  limited  number.     In  the  high 


THE  HARVEST  OF  WAR  315 

mountaias  the  burnt-out  people  of  Ga-^hi  and  Kras- 
nichi  are  reported  to  have  died  at  the  rate  of  twenty 
a  day.  And  the  hitest  letters  (April,  1914)  tell  that 
the  Greeks,  in  evacuating  part  of  the  South  Albanian 
district,  have  burnt  and  pillaged  eleven  Moslem  vil- 
lages in  the  Kolonia  and  Frasheri  districts;  that  they 
have  organized  bands  of  raiders  to  resist  Albanian 
occupation;  that  Greeks  and  Cretans,  led  by  Greek 
officers,  have  been  plundering  and  slaughtering;  and 
that  5,000  more  destitute  refugees  are  crying  for  help. 

As  an  Albanian  patriot  truly  wrote:  "  Yes,  the 
Allies  fought  side  by  side  simply  for  the  devastation 
and  extermination  of  our  nation.  The  world  must 
surely  be  amazed  that  nations  calling  themselves 
Christian  can,  through  greed  and  anger,  commit  such 
barbarities." 

So  much  for  the  past.  I  have  set  down  briefly  a 
few  of  the  things  which  I  have  seen  and  heard.  Of 
the  future  it  is  impossible  to  propliesy.  In  the 
Balkan  Peninsula  it  is  usually  the  unexpected  which 
takes  place.  The  one  thing  that  can  be  said  witli 
certainty  is  that  no  permanent  solution  of  the  Balkan 
question  has  been  arrived  at.  The  ethnographical 
questions  have  been  ignored.  A  portion  of  each  race 
has  been  handed  over  to  be  ruled  by  another  which 
it  detests.  Servia  has  acquired  a  population  which 
is  mostly  Bulgar  and  Albanian,  though  of  the  latter 
she  has  massacred  and  expelled  many  thousands. 
Bulgars  have  been  captured  by  (Jreeks,  Cheeks  by 
Bulgars,  Albanians  by  Greeks,  and  not  one  of  these 
races  has  as  yet  shown  signs  of  being  capable  to  rule 
another  justly.  The  seeds  have  been  sown  of  hatreds 
that  will  grow  and  bear  fruit. 


316         THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 

At  least  a  generation  must  pass  before  the  actual 
loss  and  waste  of  property  can  in  any  way  be  made 
up  for.  This  has  been  so  gi^eat  that  were  it  not  for 
heavy  loans  each  of  the  late  Allies  would  be  hope- 
lessly crippled.  They  are  at  the  mercy  of  such  of  the 
Powers  as  finance  them;  and  meanwhile  more  than 
one  of  the  said  Powers  stands  expectant,  ready  to 
snap  up  the  pieces  should  a  second  break-up  take 
place. 


% 


I  \  1)  I :  X 


Abdil  Hamid.  .">.  s.  lu.  11.  M 
Albania.  13.  '2irK  'J.ll.  '^41.  '2:>'2.  'JUT 
Albanian  comniittco.  .%4,  {\S 

language.  65.  72.  I'JO.  1311.  240. 

251.207 
Bchools,  13.  10.  55.  00.  73.  132. 
13l>.  240 
Alossio.  fA).  95.  114.  231 
America.  08 
Andrivovitra.  38.    107  tt  mtq.,    174. 

lh"2.  3l>2 
Archbi»li()j)  (of  Scutari).  01  cl  «tq., 

10.  90.  120.  141.  140.  280 
Arms.  18.  72.  150 
Austria.   12.   17,  40.   122.   120.   154. 

177.253,254.271 
Austrian  ConBulato.  14.  133.  1.18.  177 
Autonomy  (for  Allmnia).  23.  152.  155 
Avlona.  135.  148.  234.  309 

Balkan  States,  6,  88.  150.  100.  209. 

22i> 
Bardhanjolt.  210.  228,  257 
Batar.  17.  22.  2H8.  30M 
Bechir  (Brigadier).    195.    127.   224. 

248 
Bodri  Pa8ha.  19 
lioranj.  27.  105.  108.  171.  IS4.  227. 

237.  '2M.  302 
Berat.  3<K"..  34J9 
B«Ha.  IH.  120 
Blazho  lioHhkuvitch.  37.  41.  43,  IJIi. 

151.  1K3.  180.  189 
Blockhouhoa.  25.  ItU).  1<'.9.  173 
Bomb  affair.  20.  135.  175 
Bourchier  (Mr.. «.(  The  Ttmes),  53.  57 
Bmm      '     ■  •'       inh).  32 
Bnti~!  •  nt.  14.  l.'.O.  172 

Vi.       124.  120.  133.  147. 

UMl.  271.  2>M» 
Bulftaria,  13.  M.  103.  127.  150 
BulKam.   0.   8.    118.    140.   208.  262. 

270.  312.  315 


Burning  of  villagos,  26.  29,  35,  53. 
."iO.  90.  92  ft  *,q..  112.  100.  108. 
194,  209.  221.  2h.->.  295,  313 

Catholics.  12.   17.  19.  02.  140.  208. 

225.  247.  249.  251.  2.''>4,  202,  20<1. 

209.  284.  304 
Cottigno.  17,  20.  42.  03.  08.  71.  lO.'i. 

174.  181.  1S5.  193.  243.  2.VS 
Cholera.  75.  i>2 
Comet.  14.  18 

Constant inoj)li'.  10.  19.  5<»,  llo.  229 
Constitution  (Turkish),  3,  5,  7,  12, 

107.  110 
Correspondents,  33,  36.  63,  57.  07. 

75 
Crane  (Mr.,  of  Chicago),  50  ct  scq.. 

119 

Danilo    (CYown    Prince   of    Monto- 

nepro).  21.  05.  184.  1S9.  I'M.  2in.'. 

20<>.  229.  248.  253.  279.  304 
Dochich.    24.    1(^.    170.    187.    1h9. 

190.  193.  214.  218.  244 
])ed  Soko.  115.  177.  184 
Desecration  of  churches.  20,  50.  91. 

170.  247 
Djakova.  08.  105.  232.  230.  208.  28H. 

2l»9.  305 
Iijavid  Tanha.  14.  27.  171.  184 
DriHhti.  92.  2:{9.  24s.  *J<M 
Dukagini.  18.  27.  44.  lo5.  I.V..  2<H 

Rlbasan.  13.  20.  158.  305.  312 
Kimad  Pawha.  10.  110,  184.  264.  277. 

280.  2H3.  34>5.  310 
KurojMv  57.  59.  tV4.  129.  109.  259 
Kun>iM'nn  gunrantf*'.  t\'.\.  04.  73 
Kuru[>ean  intorwntiun.  20^.  273 

I-Vmnc*.  279 

Fr»nrii»c»ni«.  79.  2»rJ.  2«i7.  225 

Krxmticrs.  25.  40.  l.'.O.  173.  '2t\s.  •J74 

317 


318        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 


Gani  Bey,  10 

Garibaldi,  19,  40,  60 

Gelosh  Djoko,  30,  134,  141,  220 

German  Legation,  260,  264 

Graves  (Mr.),  137  et  seq.,  140,  142 

Great  Powers,  5,  8,  17,  70,  87,  164, 

174,  258,  262,  260,  268,  270.  275, 

279,  284.  297 
Greece,  13,  150,  270 
Greeks,  6,  109,  270,  280,  307,  315 
Gregovitch,  75,  157 
Gruda  tribe,   18.  27,  72,   163,   177, 

203,  213,  222,  208,  275 
Guns  (Montenegrin),  26,   166,   169, 

201,  202,  207,  210 
Gusinje,    175,    227,   208,    274,   299 

et  seq.,  305 

Hadji  Avdil,  137,  140,  146 

Heat,  33,  50,  82,  287 

Hodja,  20,  68,  69,  301 

Hospital,  14,  33,  164,  182,  191,  197, 

229,  230  et  seq.,  235  et  seq.,  241 
Hoti  (tribe).  18,  26,  45,  73,  163,  254, 

268,  275 
Houyhnhnm,    198,   201,   203,   212, 

219.  221,  227,  233.  240,  244 
Hussein  Riza  Bey,  99,  110,  120,  122, 

126,  130,  144,  228,  239.  246.  254 

Immeubles.  125,  139 

Indemnity  (for  burnt  houses),  58, 

103,  104,  HI,  123  et  seq. 
Insurgents,  25,  46,  68,  158 

(terms  ofEered  to).  58,  72,  74, 
125 
Interviews,  65,  252,  265 
Ipek.  144,  175.  220,  237,  302,  305 
Isa  Boletin,  105,  170 
Ismail  Kemal  Bey,  20,  54,  68,  158, 

270 
Italy  (her  policy),  97,  122,  149,  151 
(warwith),  94,  107,  110,  116 

Journalists,   12,   52,    61,    107,    192, 

232, 265 
Jovitchevitch  (Montenegrin  Consul), 

136,  152,  197,  274 

Kastrati,  27,  73,  90,  147,  193,  225 
King  Ferdinand  (of  Bulgaria),   17, 

181,  303 
King  Nikola  (of  Montenegro).  17,  21, 
33.  41.  63.  70.  72.  75,  103,  120, 
135,  154,  162.  178,  181,  185  et  seq., 
197,  228,  240,  245,  246,  254,  266, 
270.  272.  275,  276 


King  Peter  (of  Servia),  17 
Klimenti,  27,  49,  73,  254 
Kolashm,  158,  102,  183,  163 
Komits,  18,  124 
Kopliku,  28,  62,  203,  205,  209 
Kortcha,  103,  158,  305,  308 
Kosovo  (vilayet),  12,  68,  153,  150, 

183,  238,  246,  299 
Kralitza  (my  title),  37,  50,  107,  201 
Kulas.     See  Blockhouses 

Language.     See  Albanian  language 
Letter  (to  Sir  E.  Grey),  55,  61 
Ljuma,  239,  274 
Looting,   198,   204,   206,   208,  214, 

218,  225,  240,  247,  254,  282,  285, 

289 

Macedonia,  17,  150 

Maize,  30,  41,  52,  76,  95,  138,  147 

240,  246,  294 
Malaria,  95,  116 
Maltsia  e  madhe,  18,  110,  128,  155, 

103,  209 
Maltsors,  19,  28,  54,  62,  107,  127, 

132,    140,    150,    154  et  seq.,   176, 

182,   188,   192,  201,  et  seq.,  209, 

216,  222  et  seq.,  244,  254,  283 
Marko,  11,  95,  101,  119,  208,  281, 

285 
Martina j,  31,  76,  79,  82 
Martinovitch  (General),  60,  71.  119. 

163,  181,  208,  281,  285 
Massacres,  168,  181,  253,  288,  298, 

302 
Medua,  11,  100,  151.  228.  232,  244 
Mihilaki  Eflendi,  74,  80,  135.  152 
Mirash  Lutzi,  34,  80,  111,  123 
Mirdites,  14,  17.  59,  110,  126,  130, 

143.210   . 
Mirko  (Prince,  of  Montenegro),  21, 

180,  217,  222 
Mobilization  (Montenegrin).  38.  07, 

151,  175 
Mojkovach,  158,  101,  108.  185 
Montenegro.  11,  17,  18,  21,  28,  38. 

42,  61.  66,  75,  97,  120,  130,  149, 

155,  160.  166.  177,  193,  197,  218, 

252 

ontenegrin  army,  38,  58,  193,  200, 

208,  221 
.loslems,  4,  6,  12.  19.  42,  93.  110, 

117.  120.  130,  134,  137,  163.  204, 

218.  232.  238,  301  et  seq. 
Mosques.  6.  26.  130,  176 
Mutilation,  153,  161,  171.  176.  184, 

193,  197,  236.  257 


INDKX 


319 


Nationalist  Altiaiiiann. 'J3.  IM 
Nevinsuii  (Mr.).  IMl,  l»7.  liKt 
Nixttiu*.  IK».  "JT.  lUO.  2.'i'J 

Officers  (Yountt  Turk).  7.  12.  <JT 


UrtL......     ., ._    ...;   _.  ,.  ...... 

303 
Ottomunization  iforciMci.  S.  I.t.  If. 

•40.  107 

Parliamont  (Turkish).  5.    14U.    U.i. 

103.  107 
Peaco.  02.  70.  1»1.  173 
I'otar  (I'rinco.  u(  .Montenegro).  21 

1H7.  2<».'>.  277,  J'M 
I'olrovittb.     >«•««  lioyal  Family 
I'latutMiatz  ^.Juvun;.    171.    174.  20.>. 

210.  212  ft  Btq. 
Plamoiiati  (PoUr).    103.    107.    IIH. 

125.  133.  13.-..  20y.  2H3.  311 
Plava.  175.  l'J7.  227.  301 
Podgoritia.  20.  24.  30.  .'>0.  02.  •«. 

132.  152.  100,  170.  1S3.  227.  251. 

271 
Popovitch  (Ilia).  107 
Pojwvitch   ( Mont«n<>grin    Miitistor), 

20.  135.  l.V).  274.  2H5 
Pronk  Pasha.  14.  17.  .V.).  143 
I*res8  censors.  \HS.  I'Hi,  230.  2«i8 
Priiicessoe  (.Montoni'grm).  21.    191. 

233.  270.  27S 
Primmors.  29.    105.    171.    195.   223. 

235.  24S  rl  trq..  2.VJ  e/  /ir^. 

Prizron.    IM.    Ih3.    184J.   22.S.    2.34. 

207.  270.  '2SH.  314 
ProchashkA  (Austrian  Consul).  '2V, 

253 

Queen  (of  the  mountainB),  37.  1<'1. 

107.  201 
Quinine.  90.  114 

Red  Cross.  191.  229  ri  atq..  234.  242. 

■i;\   i:,'*  r.s 

.  141 
...OH. 

lo.'>.  3u3.  :;12.  :ii.'> 

R«|iof  work    31    1<M  w  ..,/  .  1  ij.  174. 

Si" 
Hill  -ro).27. 38. 

i  .  .    .  .      1 .1  <      I  .  .1 

(promisotl  by  Austria).  133 
Hon>.'    \\t 
Kov  tlrin).    21 


..\.,,  j.-.n 


H'.t.  103.  129.  \:*\, 

79 


^^inldrwljliri  H^y  (  I'ltrki-h  Minister). 

149 

.■»  ii""i-.  <>,  i.>.  1'.    J.     r'   ill.  132 
Scutari  (AlWania).  1».  II.  13.  71.  89. 
I  «"■    >■"    •'■'    '-'    _'MH.  212.  258. 

-     ,  •         ,;.j 

.Sorvia.  17.  Us.  131.  172.  175.  IKl. 
227.  294 

1  army.  238.  240.  257.  273. 

:«Ml.  .(1  I   ,/  A,q. 

129.103.175 
■^i  7.  .35 

.^k L .  .;.  73.  94.  113.  193. 

220 
Sla%izing  (forcible).  240.  253.  209. 

275.  30<J  t/  »tq. 
Sokol  Batzi.  33.  40.  72.  2n3.  221. 

•223.  254 
.Soothuavors.  14.  1H4.  270 
Stanko  Slarkovitch.  30.  4li.  .'^4,  1^3. 

229.  249.  2»11.  20() 
Sultan.  11.  .'><>.  102.  113.  139 
8umma  (Monsieur).   111.   124.    147. 

280 
Summa  (trilw).  93.  2G1 
I 

Tarabo«h.    11.    148.    183.    197.   20<'.. 
223.  228.  272 
,   Taxes.  10.  110.  139 
I    TtrntJi  (The).  52.  57.  71.  841 
;   Tourgouil  Pasha.  25.  02.  M.  71.  I'^'.t. 
I       220 
I   Toptani.  10 
Trio|.Khi.  20.  34.  3s.  44.  51 
Turkov.  4.  3H.  120.  140.  149.  lt,3 
Turkish  army.  38.  67.  109.  117.  174. 

300 
Turkish  Consulate.  39.  07.  73.  151 
Turkish  (;ovommpnt.  4.  37.  02.  120. 

101.  It>4 
Turks.  28.  77.  144.  148.  300 
Tun.  10.  Oy.  72.  SO.  108.  135.  I<M. 
197.  220 

I'nion  and  I^rof^reas  (Committee  of). 
14.  I3.'>.  140.  143 

\,.li    ..(  S.ut^ni,   19.  89.   III.   128. 

le).  160.  166 


320        THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SCUTARI 


Vienna,  13,  177,  234,  272 
Voinovitch  (Count  L.),  245,  286 
Vukotitch.     See  Yanko  V. 

War  (declaration  of),  187 

(preparation   for),   38,   42, 

164,  175,  183 
(with  Italy),  95,  110,  116, 
220 
Women    (Montenegrin),    195, 
204,    208,    225.    230,    236, 
288 


66, 

131, 

198, 
240, 


Wounded,  29,  32,  152, 164, 191, 205, 
216,  256 

Yanko  Vukotitch  (General),  21,  24, 

27,  29,  37,  43,  67,  71,  74,  77.  123, 

164,  171,  174,  182,  252 
Young  Turks,  3,  6,  9,  11,  13,  59.  81. 

117,  146 
Young  Turk  (methods),  7,  8,  16,  34, 

89,  92,  109,  145 

Zhivkovitch,  188,  190.  230 


^ 


BILLING   AND   SONS,    LTD.,    PRINTERS,   QL/ILDFORD 


2  ^      > 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 


UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


DR 

701 

S5D82 


Durham,  Mary  Edith 

The  struggle  for  Scutari 


