3  1822  02752  7027 


■I ^  HIGH  ALBANIA  AND  ITS 


CUSTOMS  IN  1908. 


M.    EDITH    DURHAM. 


[WITH    PLATE     XXXI.] 


alifornia 

?ional 

lility 


PU^:^ISHED    BY    THE 
50,   GREAT   RUSSELL   STREET,   LONDON,   W.C. 


Social  Sciences  &  Humanities  Library 

University  of  California,  San  Diego 
Please  Note:  This  item  is  subject  to  recall. 

Date  Due 


HIGH    ALBANIA    AND    ITS    CUSTOMS    IN    1908. 
By  M.  Edith  Durham, 

[With  Plate  XXXI.] 

High  Albania  is  the  large  tract  of  mountain  land  which  forms  the  north-west 
corner  of  Turkey  in  Europe.  It  is  the  only  spot  in  Europe  in  which  the  tribal 
system  has  been  preserved  intact  up  to  the  present  day  and  along  with  it  a  mass 
of  very  ancient  customs.  Changes  are  now  sweeping  rapidly  over  the  Balkan 
peninsula,  and  it  is  with  the  hope  of  inducing  someone  better  qualified  than  myself 
to  go  and  investigate  on  the  spot,  before  it  is  too  late,  that  I  will  try  and  give 
an  idea  of  the  very  primitive  conditions  which  still  prevail.  Writing  has,  it 
appears,  always  been  an  art  unknown  to  the  tribesman,  consequently  he  possesses 
an  extraordinary  memory,  and  has  handed  down  quantities  of  oral  traditions,  most 
of  which  remain  to  be  collected. 

Life  is  very  rough,  but  the  dangers  of  travel  in  North  Albania  have  been 
ridiculously  exaggerated.  In  most  places  I  was  received  with  enthusiasm.  Many 
districts  did  not  remember  having  been  visited  by  an  Englishman,  but  had  received 
a  few  Austrians  or  Germans ;  and  a  few  had  not  admitted  any  foreigner  at 
all  for  years.  In  such  they  only  knew  of  the  King  of  England  vaguely,  as  one  of 
the  Seven  Kings  who  are  believed  to  squat  in  a  circle  and  arrange  the  affairs  of 
Europe.  One  of  the  seven  is  the  King  of  France,  and  one,  I  believe,  the  King  of 
Poland. 

The  Albanian  tribesman  does  not  call  himself  Albanian,  but  Shcypctaar,  and 
his  land  Shci/jmii.  He  says  lie  is  the  son  of  an  eagle  {ShcypS),  and  his  laud  is  the 
land  of  eagles.  His  language  grammatically  belongs  to  the  so-called  Aryan  group, 
and  he  boasts  and  believes  that  he  is  the  oldest  thing  in  the  Balkan  peninsula — 
it  was  his  before  the  coming  of  the  Slav  or  Turk,  and  he  hates  each  with  a  bitter 
Balkan  hatred.  There  is,  I  believe,  no  valid  reason  for  doubting  that  he  is  the 
more  or  less  direct  descendent  of  the  ancient  Illyrian  tribes  that  dwelt  in  the  land 
when  we  first  have  record  of  it.  lioman,  Slav,  and  Turk  have  in  turn  held  the 
Balkan  peninsula.  But  the  mountain  tribesman  has  never  been  more  than 
nominall}^  conquered — and  is  still  unsubdued.  Empires  pass  over  him  and  run  off 
like  water  from  a  duck's  back. 

"When  I  arrived  in  Scutari,  Albania,  the  capital,  travelling  in  the  mountains 
was  strictly  forbidden  by  the  Turkish  Government,  as  the  tribes  were  in  almost 

a 


454  M.  Edith  Durham. — High  Albania  and  its  Customs  iti  1908. 

open  revolt.  But  as  I  knew  the  people  and  had  good  introductions,  I  took  French 
leave,  sneaked  out  of  the  town  in  the  grey  before  dawn,  dodged  the  gendarmerie 
outposts,  and  was  soon  safely  away  in  very  light  marching  order. 

I  visited  in  all  some  twenty-four  tribes,  and  in  many  was  lucky  enough  to 
get  a  detailed  account  of  the  tribe's  origin. 

These  tribes  are  divided  into  several  marked  groups.  The  first  group  I 
visited  was  Maltsia  e  madhc,  the  Great  Mountainous  Land.  This  consists  of  five 
large  tribes  and  three  small  ones.  Four  of  the  five  large  ones  each  tells  that  its 
ancestor  came  from  the  north  with  his  family,  thirteen  or  fourteen  generations  ago, 
flying  from  the  advancing  Turks.  In  some  cases  they  found  uninhabited  land  and 
settled  on  it.  In  others,  they  fought  with  the  men  already  on  the  land,  and  finally 
settled  among  them.  These  former  inhabitants  they  call  Anas,  which  is  inter- 
preted in  the  latest  Albanian  Dictionary  as  "  aborigines."  They  tell  that  the  Anas 
were  very  strong  and  active,  could  leap  over  six  horses  and  ate  acorns  and 
horseflesh. 

They  intermarried  with  the  Anas.  A  few  houses  in  the  Hoti  tribe  still  trace 
direct  descent  from  the  Anas,  in  the  male  line.  All  four  of  these  tribes  (Skreli 
Hoti,  Gruda,  Kilmeni)  tell  tliat  their  ancestors  came  from  Bosnia  or  the 
Herzegovina,  precise  district  unknown. 

An  approximate  date  for  the  coming  of  these  immigrants  is  the  founding  of 
the  church  of  Gruda,  three  hundred  and  eighty  years  ago,  so  they  say.  Some  of 
the  tribes  say  they  came  rather  before,  and  some  rather  after,  this  event.  This 
gives  the  date  1528.  History  shows  that,  roughly  speaking,  the  tradition  is 
probably  correct,  for  the  Turks  killed  the  last  King  of  Bosnia  in  1463,  spread 
gradually  over  the  land,  and  finally  incorporated  all  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  in  the 
Turkish  Empire  about  1590.  The  shifting  of  the  peoples  falls  well  within  this 
period  (1463-1590). 

The  family,  a  communal  of  perhaps  sixty  or  seventy  members — such  exist 
still  to-day — would  march  slowly,  rarely  more  than  fifteen  miles  a  day,  and 
would  be  long  on  the  way,  the  women  carrying  the  burdens  and  driving  the 
flocks.  There  would  be  an  armed  bodyguard  of  twenty  or  thirty  fighting  men,  for 
at  fifteen  a  tribesman  is  a  fighting  man,  and  often  carries  arms,  and  is  no  mean  foe 
at  twelve. 

Many  of  the  neighbouring  tribes  of  Montenegro  tell  precisely  the  same  tale — 
namely,  that  their  ancestors  fled  from  the  Turks  thirteen  or  fourteen  generations 
ago.  Moreover,  certain  tribes  of  Maltsia  e  madhe  and  Montenegro  actually 
acknowledge  blood-relationship,  and  trace  descent  from  a  common  forefather.  I 
am  very  strongly  inclined  to  believe  that  the  present  language  and  nationality  of 
such  tribes — that  is,  whether  to-day  they  are  Serbophone  and  Montenegrin,  or 
Albanophone  and  Albanian — has  been  determined  mainly  by  whether  they  came 
under  the  influence  of  the  Orthodox  Servian  Church  or  of  the  Eoman  Catholic 
Church.  There  is  some  evidence  to  show  that  the  people  who  came  down  from 
the   north  were    neither  Orthodox  nor  Catholic,  but  belonged  to  the  heretical 


M.  Edith  Dukham. — High  Albania  and  its  Customs  iii  1908. 


455 


Bogomil  sect,  v/hich  was  wide  spread  in  the  Balkan  peninsula  in  the  Middle  Ages. 
I  was  extremely  interested  to  find  that  the  Maltsia  e  madhe  tribes,  more  especially 
the  two,  Skreli  and  Hoti,  which  say  they  come  from  Bosnia,  the  stronghold  of 
Bogomilism,  are  freely  tattooed  on  the  hand,  arm  and  sometimes  breast,  with 
designs  that  I  at  once  recognised  as  common  in  certain  parts  of  Bosnia,  notably 
around  Jaice,  the  old  capital,  where  the  last  king  was  slain,  and  in  these  designs 
the  sun  and  the  crescent  moon  are  almost  always  factors. 


SUN   AND   MOON.      N.    ALBANIA. 


Bogomilism  was  a  form  of  Manicheeism,  and  in  Manicheeism  the  sun  and 
moon  play  a  most  important  part.  The  Christian  married  women  of  Maltsia  e 
madhe  wear  a  crescent  of  silver  filagree  or  of  gold  braid  on  their  caps.  They  vow 
and  declare  that  this  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  Turk :  "  It  is  our  custom.  We 
have  always  done  it." 

You  cannot  live  long  with  the  up-country  tribesman  without  finding  that  the 
religion  he  professes  is  the  merest  surface  veneer.  He  is  guided  for  the  most  part 
by  mysterious  superstitions  and  beliefs  hidden  in  the  recesses  of  his  soul,  and  he 
cares  no  jot  for  priest  or  hodja  when  their  teaching  runs  counter  to  his  own 


456  M.  Edith  Durham. — High  Albania  and  its  Customs  in  1908. 

Albanian  ideas  as  to  the  fitness  of  things.  He  is  a  thorn  in  the  side  of  all  his 
spiritual  pastors.  He  has  often  been  execrated  for  the  rapidity  with  which  he  will 
change  his  religion.  Whole  districts  have  been  known  to  turn  Moslem  suddenly, 
in  order  to  score  off  a  priest  who  has  offended  them.  Nor  do  they  become  good 
Moslems.  I  have  lived  with  Moslem  tribesmen  all  night  and  all  day,  but  I 
have  never  seen  one  pray  or  perform  the  ceremonial  ablutions ;  and  his 
women  are  all  unveiled.  So  long  as  he  is  allowed  to  go  on  being  Albanian  in  his 
own  way  the  tribesman  will  assume  any  faith  that  is  convenient.  Islam  lets  him 
have  his  own  way,  consequently  Islam  is  spreading.  In  some  transition  districts 
{e.g.,  Luria)  people  will  go  both  to  mosque  and  to  church.  If  they  don't  get  what 
they  want  from  one  they  try  the  other. 

To  get  at  the  real  beliefs  of  either  Moslem  or  Christian  is  most  difhcult,  but 
I  have  it,  on  what  I  believe  is  very  reliable  authority,  that  many  of  the  so-called 
Christians  will  admit  to  a  belief  in  two  conflicting  powers  of  light  and  darkness,  and 
also  that  the  sun  and  moon,  with  which  they  tattoo,  have  something  to  do  with  this. 

Twice  during  lieavy  thunderstorms  I  was  told  by  my  men  that  Kulshedra  and 
Drangue  {Drangoni)  were  fighting.  Kulshedra  is  a  female  monster  that  strives  to 
destroy  humanity  with  torrents  and  tempests,  and  Drangoni  is  a  male  being  who 
beats  her  back.  Men  and  male  animals  can  become  Drangonis,  and  women, 
serpents,  and  other  noxious  creatures  Kulshedras.  The  tribesman  has  an  intense 
belief  in  the  innate  depravity  of  all  things  feminine. 

Fasting  was  much  practised  by  the  Bogomils,  and  the  keeping  of  fasts  most 
rigidly  is  the  only  law  of  the  Catholic  Church  wliich  the  people  strictly  observe. 
These  facts  all  point  to  lingering  belief  in  a  form  of  Manicheeism. 

The  second  tribal  group  I  visited  was  the  Pulati  group,  called  also  Maltsia  e 
vogel,  the  small  mountainous  land.  Here  also  a  tale  of  immigration  is  told  by  the 
more  important  tribes,  but  of  immigration,  not  from  the  north,  but  from  the  east, 
the  district  known  in  earlier  days  as  Eashia.  These  people  tell  that  they  arrived 
before  the  Maltsia  e  madhe  people  did.  As  the  Turks  penetrated  Eashia  con- 
siderably before  they  subdued  Bosnia,  this  tale  also  is  probably  true.  They  too 
tell  that  they  found  previous  inhabitants  who  were  a  small  dark  people.  In  tlie 
tribe  of  Shala  there  are  still  eight  houses  that  trace  descent  from  these  early 
inhabitants.  The  other  families  migrated  in  a  body  "  a  long  time  ago "  to  the 
neighbourhood  of  Dechani  (probably  at  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century,  when 
the  Serbs  left  it  in  numbers  and  fled  to  Hungary).  I  remember,  when  at  Dechani 
in  1903,  being  greatly  struck  with  the  small  very  dark  Albanians  there,  for  I  liad 
previously  known  only  the  fair  type.  There  was  fighting  going  on  with  the 
Turkish  troops  not  far  off,  and  the  country  was  reckoned  in  a  dangerous  state,  and 
a  lot  of  these  little  dark  men  kindly  came  and  formed  an  armed  escort  for  me 
when  I  went  for  a  walk.  Shoshi,  the  neighbour  tribe  to  Shala,  and  consanguineous 
with  it,  tells  the  same  tale,  but  here  the  small  dark  people  have  been  wholly 
absorbed.  They  have,  however,  left  their  mark  throughout  Pulati,  where  the 
number  of  small  dark  people  largely  exceeds  that  in  Maltsia  e  madhe. 


M.  Edith  Durham. — High  Albania  and  its  Customs  in  1908.  457 

The  typical  fair  man,  common  in  Maltsia  e  madhe  and  found  in  all  the  other 
districts,  is  a  rather  tall  man  with  a  yellow  moustache,  a  fine  cut  aquiline  nose  and 
a  long  strong  jaw.  His  eyes  are  grey  or  even  quite  blue.  The  bridge  of  his  nose 
is  narrow  and  his  eyebrows  slope  downwards,  often  markedly  so.  His  skin,  where 
not  sunburnt,  is  white.  He  is  often  a  really  fine  animal,  and  very  well  aware  of 
the  fact. 

The  small  dark  man  is  insignificant  in  appearance,  and  usually  an  ugly  little 
fellow.  His  eyes  are  brown,  his  hair  grows  low  on  his  forehead.  Sometimes  a 
hairy  line  extends  along  the  temple  to  the  outer  corner  of  the  eyebrow,  giving  him 
an  oddly  monkey-like  look.     His  skin  is  olive. 

P  etween  these  two  types  there  are,  of  course,  any  amount  of  links.  The  type 
■which  'the  Albanian  himself  considers  Albanian  is  the  fair  aquiline  type.  From  the 
high  Albanian  mountains  right  down  to  the  Greek  frontier  ihe  Albanian  tells  you 
■"  We  are  a  fair  people."  And  as  he  has  never  been  worried  by  theories  of  dark  and 
fair  races,  perhaps  he  knows. 

The  question,  as  to  what  these  dark  and  fair  races  are,  is  a  very  difiicuit  one 
;and  I  do  not  think  my  theories  on  the  subject  are  of  any  value ;  so  I  will  only  give 
the  statements  of  the  people   themselves   and  say  that,  roughly  speaking,  I  found 
"the  high  Albanian  tribes  fall  into  three  groups  : — I.  Maltsia  e  madhe,  which  tells  of 
a  large  immigration  from  the  north,  and  intermarriage  with  previous  inhabitants  ; 

II.  Pulati,  with  a  tale  of  immigration  from  the  east  and  similar  intermarriage ;  and 

III.  A  group  of  tribes  which  tells  of  no  immigration,  and  boasts  that  it  has  always 
ibeen  on  the  spot.  This  includes  the  Puka  group,  or  part  of  it.  The  Berisha  and 
Merturi  men,  who  belong  to  this,  vow  that  they  have  been  there  for  ever.  They 
also  say  that  the  Albanian  is  a  fair  man.  It  is  noteworthy  that  in  the  districts 
where  such  a  tale  is  told  the  place-names  are  all  Albanian,  save  a  few  that  appear 
to  be  Latin.  In  Maltsia  e  madhe,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  many  Slavonic 
place-names. 

An  accident  quite  prevented  my  going  to  Merturi,  but  I  visited  the  Berisha 
men,  a  most  lively  lot — the  only  ones  that  very  nearly  greeted  me  with  bullets. 
But  that  was  because  I  came  with  men  who  happened  to  be  "  in  blood  "  with  them. 
I  vainly  tried  to  kodak  them  as  they  dashed  from  cover  to  cover,  howling  like  hell- 
liounds,  and  aiming  at  my  men  with  their  rifles.  It  was  "  touch  and  go,"  but  they 
were  very  sorry  afterwards,  and  we  became  great  friends.  They  brought  me 
offerings  of  honey  and  rakia  and  begged  me  to  stay  at  least  a  year,  and  I  spent  a 
week  with  them.  These  up-country  tribesmen,  who  have  rarely  seen  a  foreigner 
(Berisha  remembered  one  British  consul  and  two  Austrians),  are  very  childlike,  and 
change  from  one  mood  to  another  all  in  a  minute.  Berisha,  so  far  as  I  saw,  was 
mixed  dark  and  fair,  with  a  large  proportion  of  dark. 

Berisha  and  Merturi  are  important  tribes,  for  they  have  overflowed  and  sent 
branches  in  many  directions.  The  Merturi  founded  the  town  of  Djakova  about 
400  years  ago,  and  it  is  noteworthy  that  all  the  Djakova  men  that  I  met  who 
claimed  descent  from  Merturi  were  fair. 

I 


458  M.  Edith  Dukham. — High  Albania  and  its  Customs  in  1908. 

Customs  differ  somewhat  in  these  various  groups.  The  Maltsia  e  madhe  group 
is  by  far  the  most  tattooed.  It  is  also  the  fairest  group.  The  darker  Pulati  people 
are  very  much  less  tattooed.  We  may  perhaps  deduce  from  this  that  the  fair 
immigrant  tattooed  and  the  dark  native  did  not.  All  through  the  tribes,  whether 
dark  or  fair,  I  found  the  sun  and  moon  symbols  in  one  form  or  another. 
I  will  now  pass  on  to  some  tribal  customs, 

A  Jis  or  tribe  in  Albania  consists  of  one  or  more  hariaks,  that  is,  groups  of  men 
that  fight  under  one  standard.  Only  one  of  these  standards  now  bears  a  special 
tribe  mark  so  far  as  I  have  learnt — that  of  the  Mirdites  of  Oroshi,  which  has  a 
rayed  sun. 

In  some  tribes  all  the  bariaks  trace  descent  from  a  common  male  ancestor,  and 
the  divisions  have  only  been  made  for  convenience  when  the  tribe  grew  large.  In 
other  cases  certain  bariaks  are  of  other  blood,  and  have  been  adopted  into  the  tribe 
for  various  reasons. 

The  tribes  are  strictly  exogamous.  That  is,  they  invariably  take  wives  from 
outside  the  tribe,  excepting  only  when  a  bariak  within  it  is  of  different  blood. 
Male  blood  only  counts.  (In  a  few  cases  it  has  been  decided  by  a  tribe  that  certain 
bariaks,  though  of  common  origin,  are  now  sufficiently  removed  to  be  intermarriage- 
able.  But  these  are  exceptions.)  The  rule  is  so  strict  that  even  tribes  who  trace 
origin  from  several  brothers  will  not  intermarry.  Thus  Shalah,  Shoshi,  and  Mirdita 
are  not  intermarriageable.  All  descendants  of  a  common  male  ancestor  rank  as 
brothers  and  sisters,  and  their  union  is  looked  on  as  incestuous  and  in  the  highest 
degree  horrible.  The  offspring,  I  was  repeatedly  told,  would  be  blind,  deaf,  dumb, 
deformed — all  kinds  of  misfortunes  would  befall.  There  would  be  a  curse  on  such 
a  union,  "  for  truly  they  are  brothers  and  sisters,  and  it  is  forbidden  to  marry  one's 
own  blood."  An  exceptionally  intelligent  old  Hoti  man,  a  great  authority  on 
tribe  law,  when  I  asked  how  many  generations  must  pass  before  Hoti  could  marry 
within  the  tribe,  replied  that  "  he  hoped  it  would  never  be,  for  that  even  after  a 
thousand  years  the  blood  will  still  be  that  of  Geg  Laz  (the  tribe's  forefather),  and 
they  would  still  be  brothers  and  sisters,  and  to  marry  your  sister  is  a  great  sin." 
So  deeply  rooted  is  the  feeling  that  in  all  my  eight  months  of  wandering  I  heard  of 
only  one  instance  in  which  the  law  was  broken.  A  girl  eloped  with  a  distant 
cousin  on  her  father's  side.  He  was  far  enough  removed  for  the  Koman  Church  to 
marry  them.  But  it  was  incest  in  the  eyes  of  the  outraged  family.  The  luckless 
couple  fled  to  another  tribe  for  shelter,  but  were  hunted  down.  The  bridegroom 
was  shot  within  the  year,  as  was  also  his  brother,  who  had  aided  the  elopement 
and  the  bride's  life  was  only  saved  by  the  intervention  of  the  Franciscans.  Tribe 
law  is  stern  and  merciless. 

Female  blood  does  not  count  at  all  among  the  Moslem  tribes,  nor  did  it  till 
quite  recently  among  the  Christians.  Now  the  priests  strive  and  partially  succeed 
in  enforcing  the  Canon  Law  that  prohibits  the  marriage  of  cousins  to  the  sixth 
degree  on  both  sides.  Pope  Clement  VII,  whose  mother  was  an  Albanian,  sent  the 
Archbishop  of  Antivari  as  Visitator  Apostolicus  to  the  Albanian  mountains  in 


M.  Edith  Durham. — High  Albania  and  its  Customs  in  1908.  459 

1702.  His  report  is  a  bitter  laraent.  All  the  tribes,  he  says,  are  given  over  to 
pagan  practices.  "Among  the  execrable  customs  of  the  mountain  people,  the 
wretched  parents  are  in  the  habit  of  buying  young  girls  for  a  price  for  their  sons 
who  are  of  tender  age,  and  of  keeping  them  in  their  houses  till  of  age  to  cohabit, 
and  of  omitting  to  contract  matrimony  unless  a  male  chil(]  be  born,  even  after 
fifteen  years  of  sinful  cohabitation."  This  shows  that  the  Church  then  had  no 
control  over  the  marriages,  and  the  custom  of  not  marrying  legally  till  a  male 
is  born  is  not  yet  extinct. 

As  it  has  been  the  almost  universal  practice  to  take  a  wife  from  the  tribe  next 
door  and  to  marry  the  resultant  daughters  back  into  it  (unless  of  course  the  tribe 
be  one  that  is  consanguineous),  it  follows  that  certain  tribes  must  be  very 
closely  inbred  on  the  female  side.  So  far  as  I  could  learn  among  the  Moslems 
two  tribes  will  go  on  exchanging  daughters  backwards  and  forwards  for 
generations  (I  ascribe  to  this  practice  the  very  marked  type  of  the  Moslem 
tribes);  and  it  has  only  recently  been  checked  among  the  Christians.  But  the 
people  declare  that  such  tribes  are  in  no  way  related — have  not  one  drop  of  the 
same  blood.  I  said  a  child  had  some  of  its  mother's  blood,  but  they  said,  "  Xo, 
only  the  father's." 

The  people  all  know  most  exact  lists  of  their  relatives  on  the  male  side.  The 
fact  that  I  could  not  enumerate  my  paternal  cousins  beyond  second  cousins  was 
reckoned  as  a  proof  of  the  barbarous  state  of  English  society.  "  Just  like  dogs  or 
cattle."  In  fact,  many  of  our  habits,  about  which  they  perpetually  questioned  me, 
filled  them  with  contempt  or  disgust,  and  they  explained  the  superiority  of 
their  own. 

Whatever  may  have  been  the  origin  of  marrying  outside  the  tribe  it  does  not 
now  at  all  depend  on  the  fact,  often  noticed,  that  close  living  together  tends  to 
bring  about  prohibitory  marriage  laws,  for  tribe  land  is  extensive,  tracks  very  bad, 
and  houses  many  hours  distant  apart. 

It  seemed  incredible  to  me  that  tribe  law  should  be  so  strong  that,  say,  twelfth 
cousins  should  never  desire  to  marry  one  another.  In  practice,  however,  they  are 
rarely  given  the  chance.  All  marriages  are  arranged  by  the  elders,  usually  before 
the  parties  have  reached  maturity,  and  in  a  very  large  number  of  cases  they  are 
married  before  they  have  had  time  to  make  a  choice.  Marriage  is  entirely  by 
purchase,  except  for  the  occasional  forcible  capture  of  a  girl.  Just  before  I  went  to 
Thethi,  a  hariak  of  the  Christian  tribe  of  Shala,  they  had  had  the  effrontery  to  seize 
a  Christian  girl  of  Scutari  when  gathering  sticks  just  outside  the  town  and  carry  her 
off.  Such  however  were  her  terror  and  misery  that  the  local  Franciscan  induced 
them  to  release  her  unharmed.  A  girl  was  stolen  too  while  I  was  in  Skreli  and 
supposed  to  have  been  sold  to  the  Moslems  of  Krasnichi. 

Most  of  the  children  are  betrothed  in  infancy  or  in  early  childhood.  Some 
even  before  birth.  A  man,  so  soon  as  a  son  is  born  to  him,  seeks  a  suitable  family 
with  which  to  be  allied,  and  should  there  be  no  daughter  available,  bespeaks  the 
next  one  born.     He  often  pays  down  part  of  the  price  as  soon  as  she  is  born,  and 

h  2 


460  M.  Edith  Durham. — High  Albania  and  its  Customs  in  1908. 

the  balance  later  when  she  is  handed  over.  The  price  in  the  richer  tribes  is  from 
sixteen  to  twenty  napoleons ;  in  tlie  poorer  ones  from  ten  to  sixteen.  It  may  be 
paid  in  money  or  its  equivalent.  A  man  too  poor  for  anything  better  can  swop  an 
old  rifle  for  an  elderly  childless  widow. 

Girls  are  married  as  young  as  thirteen  and  boys  at  fifteen,  or  even  fourteen. 
But  the  age  is  rising.  I  found  the  more  intelligent  heads  of  houses  in  Maltsia  e 
madhe  objected  to  giving  a  girl  under  sixteen  or  allowing  a  youth  under  eighteen 
to  have  a  wife,  unless  an  extra  woman  was  needed  for  the  housework,  in  which 
case  they  said  they  would  give  a  wife  to  a  boy  of  sixteen.  In  such  a  case  as  this  it 
is  not  unusual  to  give  a  boy  a  wife  very  much  older  than  himself,  possibly  a  widow, 
a  strong  full  grown  widow  being  needed.  I  met  one  case  in  which  a  boy  of  fifteen 
was  married  to  a  woman  of  twenty-five.  Husband  and  wife  had  rarely  or  never 
seen  one  another  previous  to  marriage.  I  never  heard  of  a  case  in  which  a  youth 
refused  the  bride  provided  for  him.  When  I  remarked  on  this,  people  said :  "  Why 
should  he  ?  A  woman  is  a  woman  ;  God  has  made  them  all  alike."  Of  the  girls 
they  said  cheerfully,  "  Oh  !  they  get  used  to  it  after  a  week  or  two."  Such  a  thing 
as  romantic  affection  appears  to  exist  but  rarely. 

A  girl  can  escape  the  husband  to  whom  she  has  been  sold  in  one  way  only 
Should  she  resolutely  refuse  to  be  married  to  him  she  may,  by  tribe  law,  swear 
perpetual  virginity  before  twelve  witnesses,  and  she  is  then  free  and  has  certain 
privileges.  In  Maltsia  e  madhe  she  can  inherit  her  father's  land  should  he  leave 
no  son.  From  her  it  passes  to  the  nearest  heir  male.  She  may  dress  as  a  man  and 
carry  arms,  and  often  does  so ;  she  may  also  take  blood  vengeance  as  a  man  does  : 
but  this  is  seldom  done,  I  believe. 

Among  the  other  tribes  she  cannot  inherit  land,  which  passes  straight  to  the 
next  heir  male.  He  however  must  pay  her  yearly  out  of  the  estate  300  okas 
(about  650  lbs.)  of  maize,  18  ohas  of  rakia,  and  30  okas  of  wine.  Should  he  fail  to 
do  so  she  can  enforce  payment  by  an  appeal  to  the  Council  of  Elders.  Among 
these  tribes  I  saw  no  virgins  who  wore  male  attire,  and  was  told  it  was  not  customary. 
In  Maltsia  e  madhe  I  met  several.  This  practice  of  swearing  virginity  to  avoid 
marriage  with  a  man  disliked  prevails,  I  am  told,  among  the  Moslem  as  well  as  the 
Christian  tribes.  But  I  met  no  examples.  I  heard  of  one  who  had  served  in  the 
Turkish  army. 

In  all  parts  a  sworn  virgin  is  allowed  to  eat  with  the  men  and  is  treated  as  an 
equal,  exchanges  tobacco.,  and  is  generally  "  Hail !  fellow,  well  met,"  in  striking 
contrast  to  the  position  of  a  married  woman. 

No  tribesman  eats  with  his  wife;  and  the  odd  custom  still  prevails  of  a 
married  couple  never  addressing  each  other  by  name.  To  eat  with  a  woman  seems 
to  be  thought  very  degrading.  The  men  eat  first  and  the  women  eat  up  the  bits 
left  over  afterwards  at  the  other  end  of  the  room  or,  if  Moslems,  in  their  own 
quarters. 

I  was  always  treated  with  great  honour  and  classed  with  the  buck-herd.  No 
woman  was  allowed  to  eat  with  me  in  a  tribesman's  house.     I  ate  with  the  men, 


M.  Edith  Durham. — High  Albania  and  its  Customs  in  1908.  461 

but  as  they  had  to  draw  the  line  somewhere,  they  often  helped  my  horse-boy  first. 
Sometimes  they  would  not  even  let  a  woman  speak  to  me.  They  are  tremendous 
talkers,  and  found  a  foreign  female  far  too  amusing  to  be  wasted  on  their  women. 
They  also  seemed  to  have  an  idea  that  as  I  am  unmarried  I  belonged  to  the  sworn - 
virgin  class  and  was  fit  to  be  associated  with.  Moreover  both  Albanians  and 
Montenegrins  have  a  proverb  which  says  "  Long  hair,  short  wits — a  woman's 
head ! "  and  being  a  simple-minded  folk  they  jump  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
converse  holds  good,  and  credit  me  with  extraordinary  intellectual  power.  This 
landed  me  often  in  very  difficult  positions,  as  the  political  situation  was  strained 
almost  to  breaking  point,  and  I  was  called  in  to  advise. 

Among  the  Moslems  I  had  to  live  night  and  day  in  the  men's  quarters,  and 
even  in  the  great  chieftain's  house  of  the  Christian  Mirdites  no  woman  was  allowed 
to  come  near  me.  I  did  not  even  see  one,  though  I  heard  them  scuttling  behind 
the  door  to  get  a  squint  at  me,  but  the  men  chivied  them. 

An  Albanian  tribesman,  whether  Christian  or  Moslem,  has  but  one  wife  at  a 
time,  unless  he  choose  to  take  as  well  his  brother's  widow.  This  by  tribe  law  he 
may  do  one  month  after  her  husband's  death.  As  all  men  of  a  tribe  rank  as 
brothers,  it  follows  that  a  man  may  take  his  cousin's  or  uncle's  widow,  or  both, 
should  there  be  no  nearer  male  relative  than  himself  surviving.  I  heard  of  a  case 
at  Thethi  in  which  a  man  had  taken  his  uncle's  and  his  cousin's  widows,  and 
wished  to  add  a  third  and  legal  wife  to  his  household — which  caused  conflict  with 
the  priest.  This  custom  prevails  everywhere  except  in  Maltsia  e  madhe,  where  if  it 
ever  did  exist  (which  I  failed  to  learn)  it  has  now  been  extinct  long  enough  to  be 
considered  incestuous,  and  I  had  dinner  with  some  men  who  had  recently  shot 
their  brother-in-law  for  indulging  in  it. 

In  Nikaj,  an  outlying  Christian  tribe  rarely  visited  by  foreigners,  this  custom 
is  rampant,  in  spite  of  the  frequent  excommunication  of  guilty  parties  by  the 
Franciscan  mission-priest.  Here  and  in  several  other  places,  as  hell-fire  was  not 
enough  to  terrify  them,  I  was  asked  to  threaten  them  with  the  wrath  of  King 
Edward  VII.  I  tried  hard  to  learn  the  people's  reason  for  this  practice.  When 
there  is  no  child,  and  the  husband  has  been  shot  very  soon  after  marriage,  there  is 
no  doubt  that  the  idea  is  to  beget  a  child  that  is  to  rank  as  his.  Children  so 
produced  are  still  reckoned  by  many  people  as  the  actual  offspring  of  the  dead 
man,  in  spite  of  the  Eranciscans,  who  study  medical  works,  and  gravely  assure 
their  flocks  that  the  thing  is  impossible. 

Where  children  already  exist,  the  arrangement  is  largely  one  of  convenience. 
The  woman  must  remain  in  the  house  to  bring  up  the  children.  If  there  be  an 
unmarried  brother  in  the  house  he  can  thus  obtain  a  wife  without  paying  for  her — 
a  great  consideration  in  a  poor  family ;  also  as  one  young  man  explained  very 
earnestly  the  woman  is  to  be  considered.  He  was  excommunicated,  and  so  was  all 
his  communal  household  (eighteen  persons),  because  of  his  relations  with  his 
cousin's  widow.  He  said,  "  She  has  three  children,  so  she  must  stay  with  us  to 
bring  them  up,  and  so  of  course  she  cannot  marry  again."     (It  would  be  contrary 


462  M.  Edith  Durham. — High  Albania  and  its  Customs  in  1908, 

to  all  tribe  law  to  briog  a  strange  man  into  the  house.)  "  But  she  is  only  twentj' 
four,  and  to  force  her  to  live  a  single  life  would  be  very  wrong.  That  is  why 
I  have  taken  her.  I  have  a  wife  already,  so  I  do  not  need  her.  I  am  sorry  I  am 
excommunicated,  but  I  am  an  honourable  man  and  I  must  act  rightly  to  my 
cousin's  widow." 

A  childless  widow  in  Maltsia  e  madhe  reverts  to  her  own  family,  which  can 
sell  her  again,  and  generally  does  so  at  once.  In  other  tribes  the  husband's  family 
has  the  right  of  keeping  her.  If  they  decide  to  sell  they  divide  the  price  obtained 
with  her  own  family. 

A  widow  long  married  and  childless  is  of  slight  value,  as  probably  incapable 
of  child-bearing.  A  young  healthy  widow,  married  but  a  few  months,  is  on  the 
other  hand  snapped  up  at  once,  and  often  fetches  a  higher  price  than  a  maiden. 

There  is  a  dearth  of  women  in  High  Albania.  The  people  declare  that  it  is 
because  God  knows  that  many  men  will  be  shot,  and  so  provides  an  extra  supply. 
I  beHeve  myself  that  one  of  the  reasons  is,  that  owing  to  the  very  young  age  at 
which  girls  are  married,  there  is  a  cruelly  high  death-rate  in  child  bearing.  But  in 
some  of  the  tribes  where  church  registers  of  baptisms  and  deaths  have  now  been 
carefully  kept  for  some  years  it  really  appears  that  a  considerable  excess  of  males 
is  born  and  reaches  maturity.  Then  the  male  death  rate  from  gunshot  wounds  is 
high  and  thins  them  off  a  bit. 

Life  among  the  outlying  Christian  tribes  is  so  primitive  that  I  doubt  if  I  can 
make  it  understood.  The  communal  family  lives  in  a  hula,  a  great  stone  tower  two 
or  three  storeys  high.  It  has  no  windows,  only  loopholes  for  rifles.  It  is  often 
perched  on  a  rock  for  better  defence.  The  ground  floor  is  a  pitch-dark  stable. 
The  entrance  to  the  dwelling  is  by  a  flight  of  stone  steps  to  the  first  floor.  An 
awful  stencil  grips  your  throat.  In  pitch  darkness  you  climb  a  wooden  ladder  to 
the  living  room  up  under  the  stone  roof  on  which  the  sun  blazes,  making  it  as  hot 
as  a  furnace.  Thirty  or  forty  human  beings  of  all  ages  and  both  sexes  are  here 
crowded  together.  Here  they  are  born  and  die,  and  here  they  bring  their  new 
bought  brides  without  any  kind  of  privacy  whatsoever.  The  house  is  ruled  by 
the  Xoti  i  shpis,  the  house-lord,  and  all  the  household  obey  him  like  dogs.  If  you 
ask  why,  they  will  tell  you  it  is  because  he  is  the  head — the  right  to  rule  is  in  his 
branch  of  the  family — God  made  him  head — if  he  is  head  of  course  you  must 
obey.     In  some  cases  he  still  has  power  of  life  and  death  over  his  subjects. 

The  house  is  often  filthy  beyond  all  words.  Though  the  painted  chests  ranged 
round  the  walls  may  be  full  of  fine  embroidered  clothes  for  festivals,  and  silver- 
mounted  pistols  hang  on  the  walls,  the  people  are  clad  in  dirty  rags  on  which  the 
lice  crawl  calmly.  The  little  children  are  often  naked.  The  axe-hewn  planks  of 
the  floor  (made  by  cutting  down  a  tree  and  then  chopping  all  of  it  away  till  a 
plank  of  the  right  size  is  obtained)  are  caked  with  dirt  and  saliva.  Two  sheep  or 
goats  are  tethered  in  a  corner,  fetlock  deep  in  dung.  They  bring  luck  to  the  house 
and  promote  its  fertility.  You  sit  on  this  floor  or  on  a  log.  If  there  be  a  chair  it 
is  the  throne  of  the  house-lord  and,  especially  in  Shala  and  Shoshi,  is  possibly 


M,  Edith  Durham. — High  Albania  and  its  Customs  in  1908.  463 

adorned  with  a  carved  sun  at  the  back,  and  a  crescent  moon  on  either  arm. 
Through  the  floor  rises  the  hot  reek  of  ammonia  from  the  stables,  and  you  are 
scarcely  seated  before  a  black  cloud  of  buzzing  flies  settles  on  you.  The  house-lord 
entertains  you  with  elaborate  ceremony.  He  makes  the  coffee  himself.  It  is  an 
insult  to  offer  a  guest  coffee  made  by  a  woman.  And  above  all  things  the  house- 
lord  is  a  gentleman  according  to  his  lights.  He  offers  you  "  bread  and  salt  and 
my  heart "  {huh  c  krype  e  zemer  t'emen),  which  takes  the  form  of  rank  sheep-cheese 
and  raJcia  distilled  from  his  own  grapes.  There  are  endless  healths  to  be  drunk, 
between  each  of  which  a  bit  of  cheese  is  eaten.  The  ralda  keeps  down  the  cheese, 
and  the  cheese  tames  the  rahia.  If  you  are  not  prepared  to  undergo  this  ordeal 
do  not  enter  a  hida,  for  you  will  give  dire  offence.  Hospitality  is  the  law  of  the 
mountains,  and  the  house-lord  freely  gives  you  of  his  best. 

Amulets  are  freely  worn  to  keep  off  the  evil  eye  {Syij  i  kec).  Albania  swarms 
with  devils  and  spirits  {On'),  magicians  and  witches  {Shtriga).  "Women  in  Albania 
are  all  born  wicked.  In  some  districts  probably  quite  half  the  women  have 
dealings  with  the  devil.  But  it  is  very  hard  to  detect  them,  Shtrigas  can  work 
many  wonders,  bewitch  a  man  so  that  he  witheis  and  dies,  or  suffers  aches  and 
pains.  A  Shtriga  can  make  herself  quite  small  like  a  bee,  and  get  into  a  house 
through  the  keyhole  or  under  the  door  at  night  and  suck  a  person's  blood  so  that 
he  fades  and  dies  in  time.  The  best  safeguard  is  hard  to  get.  A  Shtriga  always 
vomits  the  blood  she  has  sucked.  You  must  secretly  track  a  woman  you  suspect 
to  be  a  Shtriga  when  she  goes  out  to  vomit  the  blood.  You  must  scrape  some  of 
it  up  on  a  silver  coin  and  wear  it,  and  then  no  Shtriga  can  harm  you. 

Nothing  is  too  marvellous  for  a  tribesman  to  believe.  Here  is  a  good  example, 
which  the  teller,  a  man  from  Djakova,  believes  most  firmly.  A  young  married 
woman  who  was  pregnant  craved  for  wine,  but  the  family  was  too  poor  to  buy 
any.  Her  mother-in-law,  who  was  a  Shtriga,  stripped  the  young  wife  quite  naked 
and  anointed  her  all  over  with  a  salve  which  she  made,  at  the  same  time  saying 
certain  magic  words.  The  young  wife  at  once  shrank  to  the  size  of  a  bee.  "  Go, 
my  daughter  "  said  the  Shtriga,  "  to  the  cellar  of  old  so-and-so,  crawl  in  at  the 
keyhole  and  drink  all  you  want.  But  take  care  not  to  say  the  name  of  God." 
Off  went  tlie  young  wife  to  the  cellar,  entered  and  drank  her  fill.  She  then  felt 
so  much  better  that  she  cried  "  Thank  God  ! "  At  once  she  became  her  natural 
size.  "  Oh  what  a  dreadful  position  for  a  virtuous  married  woman,"  cried  my 
informant  with  deep  feeling,  "  to  be  in  a  strange  cellar  with  nothing  on  at  all !  " 
There  she  had  to  stay  till  the  owner  of  the  cellar  opened  it  next  day.  He  was 
much  surprised  to  find  her,  but  as  he  was  a  very  kind  man,  he  lent  her  a  coat  to 
go  home  in  and  never  doubted  her  explanation.  And  the  Djakovan  who  told  the 
tale  knew  the  woman,  knew  the  owner  of  the  cellar,  and  had  seen  the  keyhole. 
What  more  proof  can  you  require  ?  MoreoN^er,  as  he  remarked,  how  else  can  you 
explain  the  occurrence  ? 

I  saw  a  Moslem  man  who  knew  how  to  summon  devils  by  hopping  on  one  leg 
and  waving  the  other  behind  him.     But  I  was  with  Christian  tribesmen,  and  such 


464  M.  Edith  Durham. — High  Albania  and  its  Customs  in  1908. 

was  their  terror  that  he  would  cast  a  spell  upon  me  that  they  would  not  allow 
him  to  come  within  a  hundred  yards  of  me,  much  less  let  me  see  him  perform. 

When  a  child  is  born  you  should  break  an  egg  over  its  face  to  keep  off  the 
evil  eye  ;  and  when  a  house  is  built  you  must  kill  a  cock  or  a  lamb  and  sprinkle 
the  blood  on  the  foundations.  These  two  customs  are  still  practised  at  Scutari,  and 
the  old  fortress  on  the  hill  is  one  of  the  places,  in  the  foundations  of  which  a  woman 
is  said  to  have  been  built  in  the  Middle  Ages  as  an  offering  to  the  devils  that 
destroyed  it  as  fast  as  it  was  built. 

At  night  in  Albania  the  tracks  are  often  infested  with  devils  who  take  the 
form  of  flashes  of  lire,  and  no  matter  how  well  a  man  may  know  the  way  he  cannot 
go  on  till  the  first  cock  crows  and  the  devils  disappear.  A  man  I  know  who  has 
been  bothered  in  this  way  says  it  is  no  use  to  do  anything  but  cross  yourself  and 
wait  patiently  for  cockcrow. 

Save  for  an  iron  pot  or  tv,^o  brought  from  Scutari,  and  the  coffee  cups,  every- 
thing used  in  the  kula  is  home  made.  The  bowls,  spoons,  and  troughs  are  hacked 
rudely  from  lumps  of  wood.  The  clothes  are  home  spun  and  home  woven.  The 
woollen  stuff  {shiak)  is  measured  by  the  Kimt — the  length  of  the  forearm ;  the 
Pcrchik — that  is  the  stretch  of  the  thumb  and  index  finger ;  the  Shplak — the 
breadth  of  four  fingers ;  and  the  Plain — the  stretch  of  the  thumb  and  little  finger. 
Land  is  measured  by  the  Ar,  as  much,  that  is,  as  two  oxen  can  plough  in  a  whole 
day.  Ar  appears  to  be  connected  with  the  Latin  arare.  The  Albanian  for  a 
plough  is  parmen,  and  to  plough  is  mc  livrue. 

Distance  is  measured  by  the  hour  only,  and  corn  by  the  horse  [kal), 
i.e.,  horseload.  Riches  are  flocks  and  corn  and  weapons.  Xo  tribesman  has  much 
in  corn.  Maize  and  milk  are  staple  diet.  Meat  on  feast  days  when  people  eat 
like  boa  constrictors. 

The  tribes  are  all  self-governing.  The  amount  of  independence  they  enjoy, 
and  whether  or  not  they  pay  fines  or  tribute  to  the  Turkish  Government,  depends 
upon  their  fighting  power  and  the  more  or  less  inaccessibility  of  the  tribe  land. 

Tribe  government  is  by  a  council  {Medjliss)  of  elders.  This  varies  in  number 
according  to  the  importance  of  the  business  in  hand.  In  Maltsia  e  madhe  a  full 
council  to  deal  with  matters  concerning  the  whole  tribe  consists  of  the  Bariaktar 
(hereditary  standard  bearer),  two  Voyvodas,  twelve  elders  specially  chosen  for  their 
knowledge  of  tribe  law,  and  seventy-two  heads  of  houses.  The  term  Voyvoda  is 
a  Slavonic  one,  and  does  not  occur  in  the  other  districts.  Among  the  other  tribes 
a  full  council  consists  of  the  Bariaktar  and  the  heads  of  all  the  chief  houses.  In 
certain  districts,  notably  Shala  and  Shoshi,  an  active  radical  party  has  sprung  up 
lately  called  the  Diclmnii  (youth),  which  has  elected  its  own  head  and  refused  to 
recognise  the  hereditary  right  in  council  of  the  Bariaktar.  These  new  councils 
have  passed  some  good  modifications  of  tribe  laws,  and  managed  to  enforce  them. 

The  law  of  the  mountains  is  known  as  the  Canon  of  Lek  Dukaghin.  He  was 
one  of  a  chieftain  family  that  ruled  all  Pulati,  Puka,  Mirdita,  Luria,  and  Ljuma  in 
the  middle  ages,  and  down  to  the  taking  of  Scutari  in  1479  by  the  Turks.     Lek 


M.  Edith  Durham. — High  Albania  and  its  Customs  in  1908.  465 

(Alexander),  whose  identity  cannot  be  determined — there  were  several  of  the  name 
and  a  mass  of  conflicting  tradition — is  regarded  by  the  tribesmen  with  extra- 
ordinary awe.  He  is  said  to  have  come  from  Eashia  with  the  ancestors  of  Shala, 
Shoshi,  and  Mirdita,  and  the  present  ruling  family  of  Mirdita,  now  represented  by 
Prenk  Bib  Doda,  claims  to  be  of  Dukaghin  blood.  The  tribes  that  were  ruled  by 
the  Dukaghins  still  call  themselves  Dukaghini. 

To  Lek  these  tribesmen  ascribe  every  law,  almost  every  custom  and  habit 
that  they  have.  That  the  bulk  of  the  laws  are,  however,  very  much  earlier  than 
Lek's  time  is  obvious.     I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  the  penalties  chiefly  are  his. 

To  the  tribesmen,  however,  all  the  so-called  laws  of  Lek  are  as  divine  decrees ; 
and  especially  does  he  believe  that  Lek  ordered  blood  vengeance.  Into  the  com- 
plicated rules  of  blood  I  have  not  space  to  enter.  They  dominate  the  whole  life 
of  the  tribesman.  Everything  turns  on  ghaJc  (blood).  I  have  discussed  it  endlessly 
— for  the  family  blood  feud  is  the  main  topic  of  conversation — and  collected  a 
mass  of  cases. 

It  is  usual  for  writers  who  do  not  know  him  to  denounce  the  tribesman  as  a 
vulgar  murderer,  who  kills  wantonly  for  the  sake  of  killing.  But  in  order  to 
understand  a  custom  one  must  see  it  through  native  eyes.  After  living  some 
eight  months  among  blood-hunters,  I  perceived  what  ghak  meant  to  them.  It  is 
not  so  much  a  punishment  which  they  inflict,  as  an  act  performed  for  self  purifica- 
tion, and  as  such  a  solemn  and  necessary  act.  For  there  are  certain  offences  that 
blacken,  not  merely  the  honour  of  the  man  against  whom  they  have  been  com- 
mitted, but  blacken  also  the  honour  oC  his  whole  house  and  even  of  his  tribe. 
Only  blood  can  cleanse  the  stain.  And  the  man  whose  honour  is  blackened  is 
obsessed  with  the  idea  of  his  own  impurity.  It  gives  him  no  rest.  Blood  he 
must  have.  In  all  the  outlying  tribes  in  which  the  blood  laws  are  quite 
unmodified,  male  blood  of  the  offender's  house,  even  of  a  quite  distant  cousin, 
suffices ;  or  if  the  affair  be  intertribal,  blood  of  the  offender's  tribe.  In  such  cases 
an  absolutely  innocent  man  who  is  ignorant  of  the  cause  of  offence  may  be 
sacrificed ;  and  his  blood  cleanses  the  other's  honour,  who,  triumphant,  announces 
his  deed.  He  is  now  in  turn  liable  to  be  shot,  and  should  he  have  slain  a  man  of 
his  own  tribe,  by  tribe  law  his  house  will  be  burnt,  his  corn  burnt,  and  in  some 
districts  his  trees  felled  and  his  cattle  slaughtered  too.  But  all  this  is  of  but 
small  moment.     His  honour  is  clean,  and  if  he  must  die  he  dies  happy. 

A  man  of  the  Christian  tribe  of  Nikaj  who  was  seeking  blood  was  exhorted 
by  the  Franciscan  to  desist,  and  threatened  with  the  torments  of  hell.  "  I  would 
rather  clean  my  honour  and  go  to  hell,"  he  replied,  and  went  out  to  slay.  He 
slew,  but  was  himself  mortally  wounded.  The  Franciscan  hastened  to  the  spot, 
and  begged  him  to  confess  and  repent  while  yet  there  was  time.  The  dying  man 
said,  "  I  do  not  want  your  absolution  or  your  heaven,  for  I  have  cleaned  my 
honour."     And  he  died. 

We  may  regret  that  "  his  honour  rooted  in  dishonour  stood  " ;  but  there  is 
a  tragic  grandeur  about  the  man  who  is  ready  to  sacrifice  all  he  has,  all  that  he 


466  M.  Edith  Dukham. — High  Albania  and  its  Customs  in  1908. 

holds  dear,  and  even  life  itself,  in  order  that  he  may  do  that  which  he  believes  to 
be  right.     It  is  not  every  one  that  is  prepared  so  to  act  up  to  his  ideals. 

When  you  meet  a  tribesman  and  he  drinks  to  you,  Tu  nghiat  tjeter  (long  life 
to  thee),  remember  to  drink  Tu  nghiat  me  ncers  (long  honour  to  thee)  in  return ; 
for  honour  is  better  than  life — in  Albania. 


Appendix. 
Table  of  the  Tribes  of  North  Albania. 

Maltsia  e  Madlic  Group.     {Great  Movntain  Land.) 

I.  Gruda. — A  tribe  of  one  hariak,  situated  between  the  Eiver  Tsem  and  the 
Montenegrin  frontier.  North  of  it  is  the  Kuchi  tribe  (Montenegro),  and  south 
the  Hoti.  Gruda  consists  of  about  500  houses  (a  house  is  vaguely  reckoned  in 
Maltsia  e  niadhe  as  eight  or  ten  persons).  Of  these  eighty  trace  descent  from 
Berisha  (see  below),  and  the  remainder,  who  are  called  Gell  (?  -Djell),  are  immigrants 
from  the  Herzegovina.  They  state  that  the  church  of  Gruda  was  built  380  years 
ago,  shortly  after  their  arrival.  Gruda  is  now  about  half  Moslem  and  half 
Catholic.     The  Berisha  and  Djell  stocks  are  intermarriageable. 

II.  ffoti. — A  large  tribe  situate  south  of  Gruda  and  extending  to  the  shore  of 
Scutari  Lake.  On  the  east  it  is  divided  from  Kastrati  by  the  Licheni  Hotit,  an 
arm  of  the  lake.  It  consists  of  one  hariak  of  about  500  houses.  All  are  Catholic 
but  three,  those  of  the  Bariaktar's  family.  This  turned  Moslem  seven  generations 
ago.  All  Hoti,  except  twelve  houses,  traces  descent  from  Bosnia.  These  twelve 
are  called  Anas,  and  are  of  unknown  origin.     They  were  there  when  Hoti  came. 

Shortly  after  the  building  of  the  church  of  Gruda,  thirteen  generations  ago, 
Geg  Laz,  the  ancestor  of  Hoti,  arrived  with  his  family.  Geg  was  one  of  four 
brothers.  The  others  were  Piper,  Vaso,  and  Krasni.  From  these  descend  the 
Piperi  and  the  Vasojevichi  of  Montenegro,  who  are  Serbophone  and  belong  to  the 
Orthodox  Church.  Krasni  is  ancestor  of  the  Krasnichi,  now  Moslem  and  Albano- 
phone  (see  below).  Hoti  is  consanguineous  also  with  half  the  Triepshi  tribe,  which 
branched  from  it  later,  and  reckons  consanguinity  also  with  part  of  Nikaj  because 
it  branched  from  Krasnich,  which  is  consanguineous.  Marriage  is,  therefore,  pro- 
hibited with  all  these.  Hoti  intermarries  with  the  Anas,  but  mainly  marries  with 
Kastrati. 

III.  Kastrati. — Consisting  also  of  about  500  houses,  lies  between  the  Licheni 
Hotit  and  the  Skreli  tribe.  300  houses  trace  descent  from  one  Delti  or  Dedli, 
who  came  with  his  seven  sons  from  the  hariak  of  Drekalovich  of  the  Kuchi.  This 
in  turn  traces  origin  from  Berisha  (see  below).  The  other  200  houses  trace  from 
people  already  on  the  spot  when  Delti  arrived.  They  are  said  to  have  been  Slavs. 
All  are  now  Albanophone  and  the  majority  Catholic,  the  rest  Moslems. 


M.  Edith  Durham. — High  Albania  and  its  Customs  in  1908.  467 

IV.  Skreli  is  situated  in  the  valley  of  the  Proni  Thaat.  It  is  mainly  Catholic, 
and  traces  its  origin  from  Bosnia.     It  is  one  hariak. 

V.  Kilmeni. — A  very  widely-spread  tribe  of  four  hariaks — Seltze,  Vukli,  Boga, 
and  Nikshi.  These  descend  each  from  one  of  the  four  sons  of  Kilmeni,  the 
ancestor  of  the  tribe.  He  arrived  in  the  land  about  thirteen  generations  ago. 
Nevertheless,  these  four  bariaks  are  now  considered  sufficiently  far  removed  to  be 
intermarriageable,  and  marry  freely.  This  is  exceptional.  Kilmeni  came  vaguely 
''  from  the  north."  Seltze  (300  houses,  all  Catholic)  lies  at  the  head  of  the  valley 
of  the  Tsem  Seltzit,  one  of  the  sources  of  the  Tsem.  The  majority  of  the  houses, 
Djenovich  Seltze,  descend  from  Kilmeni.  The  rest,  Kabijenovich  Seltze,  are  of 
other  stock,  some  say  from  near  Eijeka  in  Montenegro. 

Vukli  lies  at  Tsem's  other  source,  Tsem  Vuklit.  It  is  ninety-four  families 
{number  of  persons  to  a  family  unknown),  all  Catholic. 

Boga  lies  at  the  source  of  the  Proni  Thaat.  It  is  seventy-five  families,  almost 
all  Catholic. 

Kikshi  (154  houses,  almost  entirely  Moslem)  lies  between  Vukli  and  Boga. 

Kilmeni  is  migratory.  It  descends  in  large  numbers  to  the  plains  near 
Alessio  to  pasture  flocks  in  the  winter,  and  returns  to  the  mountains  for  summer. 
It  has  thrown  out  branches  in  several  other  districts  (see  below). 

VI.  Zohe  (or  Lohja) . — A  small  tribe  of  one  bariak,  consisting  of  eighty  Moslem 
<and  forty  Catholic  houses. 

VII.  Beclii,  also  small,  and  mostly  Moslem.  Eechi  and  Lohe  are  said  to  be 
of  mixed  origin  from  Shlaku  and  Pulati.     Probably  overflows  of  those  districts. 

VIII.  Rioli,  small  Christian  tribe.  I  passed  through  quickly,  and  did  not 
learn  its  origin. 

These  three  all  lie  between  Skreli  and  Pulati,  and  the  whole  eight  form  the 
Maltsia  e  madhe  group,  and  are  included  in  the  diocese  of  Scutari. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  there  is  a  sprinkling  of  Slavonic  names  throughout 
Maltsia  e  madhe. 

On  the  shore  of  the  Lake  of  Scutari,  north  of  Scutari,  is  a  small  Moslem  tribe, 
Kopliku,  and  between  it  and  Lohe  the  small  Moslem  tribe  Grizhi.  Between 
Kopliku  and  Scutari  is  the  orthodox  Serbophone  village  of  Vraka,  the  only 
Serbophone  district  in  Albania.  It  is  of  mixed  descent  from  refugees  from  Bosnia 
and  Montenegro,  who  fled  from  blood.     It  reckons  about  1,000  souls. 

Pulati  Growp. 
Pulati  is  difficult  to  define,  as  its  ecclesiastical  limits  (the  diocese  of  Pulati) 
extend  farther  than  the  tribes  actually  called  Pulati  by  the  people.     Lower  Pulati, 
or  Pulati  proper,  includes  four  tribes. 

I.  Ghoanni. — A  small  Catholic  tribe  of  one  bariak. 

II.  Plani. — A  Catholic  tribe  of  one  bariak,  tracing  origin  from  three  stocks 
which  are  intermarriageable.     One  descends  from  KUmeni  {q.v.). 

III.  Mgula. — Small  Catholic  tribe,  one  bariak. 


468  M.  Edith  Durham. — Hvjh  Albania  and  its  Customs  in  1908. 

IV.  Kiri. — Catholic  tribe  of  one  hariak. 

The  other  tribes  included  in  the  diocese  of  Pulati  are : — 

V.  Shala. — This  is  a  very  large  and  extensive  tribe,  occupying  all  the  upper 
part  of  the  valley  of  the  Eiver  Shala,  and  reaching  to  the  summits  of  the  mountains 
that  form  the  watershed  on  either  side.  Shala  consists  of  four  hariahs,  Thethi, 
Petsaj,  Lothaj,  and  Lekaj.  All  descend  from  a  common  ancestor.  Three  brothers 
are  reported  to  have  fled  from  Eashia  when  it  was  overrun  by  the  Turks  (this 
would  be  at  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  or  beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century).  One 
had  a  saddle  {Shala),  the  other  a  winnowing  sieve  {ShosJi),  and  the  third  nothing ; 
so  he  said  Mir  dit  (good-day)  and  went  off.  This  is  the  legendary  origin  of  Shala, 
Shoshi,  and  Mirdita.  They  still  reckon  that  they  are  too  nearly  related  to  be 
intermarriageable.  The  hariak  Thethi  occupies  the  head  of  the  valley.  It  consists 
of  180  houses,  all  Catholic.  (A  house  in  all  Pulati  averages  many  more  inmates  than 
in  Maltsia  e  madhe,  as  the  custom  of  large  communal  families  prevails.  There  may 
be  as  many  as  forty,  or  even  more.)  Thethi  is  self-governing,  and  is  almost  inde- 
pendent of  the  rest  of  Shala.  Petsaj,  Lothaj,  and  Lekaj  are  said  to  have  separated 
into  three  main  houses  376  years  ago.  They  are  now  bariaks.  Lothaj  and  Lekaj 
have  quite  recently  decided  that  they  are  far  enough  removed  to  be  intermarriage- 
able.  Thethi  and  Petsaj  will  not  intermarry  within  the  tribe.  Shala  tells  that,  when 
it  arrived  in  the  land,  there  were  already  small  dark  people  inhabiting  it.  With 
these  they  intermarried.  Eight  houses  near  Abate,  lower  Shala,  trace  origin  from 
these  earlier  folk.    The  rest  of  them  emigrated  to  Dechani.    Shala  is  entirely  Catholic. 

VI.  Shoshi. — Origin  as  above.  It  lies  south  of  Shala  on  the  right  bank  of 
the  Shala  Eiver. 

VII.  Toplana. — Is  a  small  Catholic  tribe  of  one  hariak  lying  east  of  Shoshi. 
It  is  in  a  very  wild  district,  and  has  the  highest  death-rate  from  gunshot  wounds 
of  all  the  Christian  tribes.     It  tells  that  it  is  very  old. 

The  whole  district  occupied  by  the  above  tribes  is  called  Maltsia  e  vogel, 
the  Little  Mountain  Land.     Also  included  in  the  diocese  of  Pulati  is  : 

VIII.  Nikaj. — This  is  an  offshoot  from  the  Moslem  tribe  of  Krasnich  (brother 
to  Hoti,  q.v.).  Its  ancestor  Nikol  left  Krasnich  while  Krasnich  was  yet  Christian. 
(Catholic  or  Orthodox  ?).  One  hundred  houses  of  Nikaj,  the  Tsuraj,  trace  descent 
from  a  daughter  of  Mkol  who  bore  an  illegitimate  son  by  a  gypsy  which  Nikol 
adopted.  This  is  the  only  case  of  female  descent  I  heard  of.  Nikaj  is  all  Catholic. 
It  is  one  of  the  wildest  and  most  poverty-stricken  of  the  tribes. 

Piika  Group. 

Puka  is  a  very  large  tribe  of  seven  bariaks : — 

Puka. — All  Moslem.  Cheriti. — Part  Catholic,  part  Moslem.  Chiri. — All 
Catholic.  DushaJ  (?)  — All  Catholic.  Komani. — Catholic.  Kahashi. — Moslem. 
And  Beriska  with  Merturit-Gurit,  all  Christian.  These  two  last  are  entirely 
Catholic.  They  tell  no  tale  of  immigration,  but  claim  to  be  among  the  very  oldest 
inhabitants.     (See  Gruda  ante.) 


M.  Edith  Durham. — High  Albania  and  its  Customs  in  1908.  469 

Postripa  Groiqy. 

MazTcku. — A  small  Catholic  tribe  on  the  Drin,  east  of  Scutari. 

Drishti. — All  Moslem,  small  tribe. 

Shlahu. — Tribe  of  one  bariak,  on  right  bank  of  Drin,  all  Catholic.  Traces 
origin  from  Toplana  (q.v.). 

Dushmani. — A  Catholic  tribe  of  two  bariahs : — Dushmani  (160  houses)  and 
Temali.  It  takes  its  name  from  one  Paul  Dushman,  who  was  chieftain  in  the 
fifteenth  century. 

Sunia. — A  largely  Catholic  tribe  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Kiri.  All  these  are 
included  in  the  Diocese  of  Pulati. 

Mirdita. 

The  largest  and  most  important  tribe  of  all.  It  is  wholly  Catholic,  and  has  an 
independent  ecclesiastical  head,  the  Abbot  of  Mirdita ;  and  an  hereditary  Prince 
of  the  whole  tribe,  Prenk  Biba,  called  Prenk  Pas.     It  consists  of  five  bariahs. 

Of  these  three,  Oroshi,  Spachi,  and  Kushneni,  trace  origin  from  the  original 
ancestor  who  fled  from  Piashia.  (See  Shala,  ante.)  They  are  therefore  consan- 
guineous and  not  intermarriageable.  Xor  do  they  marry  Shala  or  Shoshi.  They 
marry  chiefly  Kthela  and  Luria. 

The  fourth  bariak,  Fandi,  belonged  to  the  Ljuma  group,  but  left  it  whenLjuma 
turned  Moslem  and  joined  Mirdita.  The  fifth  bariak  Dibri  (not  to  be  confounded 
with  the  Moslem  Debra  of  the  Ljum  group)  is  also  of  another  stock.  These  two 
iariaks  are  therefore  marriageable  with  the  first  three. 

Mirdita  in  all  reckons  3,000  houses,  with  an  average  of  ten  souls  to 
a,  house.  The  three  first  bariaks  state  that  the  Pestriku  mountains  were  their 
original  home. 

Kthela. 

With  Mirdita  in  war  marches  Kthela.  Mirdita  and  Kthela  have  the  right  to 
lead  in  all  wars  with  the  south.  Hoti  leads  in  all  wars  with  the  north.  Kthela 
is  a  large  tribe  of  three  bariaks : — Kthela,  all  Catholic :  Selati  and  Pelati,  both 
mixed.     Mohammedanism  is  spreading. 

Moslem,  Tribes. 
The  wholly  Moslem  tribes  nearly  all  lie   to  the  east  of  the  large  Christian 
tribes,  and  occupy  the  lower  lying  and  more  fertile  lands  where  the  mountains 
sweep  down  towards  the  plains.     They  are  reluctant  to  admit  strangers  to  their 
territories,  and  very  suspicious  of  qviestions. 

Debra  G-roup. 
I.  Luria. — Is  the  liead  tribe  of  this  group,  one  bariak,  200  houses. 
In  twenty  there  are  still  some  Christians.  No  house  is  entirely  Christian,  and 
Islam  is  making  quick  progress.  When  Christian  (recently)  it  intermarried 
•considerably  with  Mirdita.  Now  marries  the  two  other  tribes  of  the  group,  Matija 
and  Debra. 


470  M.  Edith  Durham. — High  Albania  and  its  Customs  in  1908. 

II.  Matija. — Wholly  Moslem  ;  I  did  not  visit  it.  It  is  said  to  consist  of  1,200 
houses,  and  covers  much  land. 

III.  Dcbra. — All  Moslem.  I  did  not  visit  it.  These  three  tribes  are  among 
the  most  independent  of  all. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  Luria  in  the  middle  ages  formed  part  of  the  Dukaghin 
principality,  while  Matija  and  Debra,  it  would  appear,  owned  allegiance  to 
Skenderbeg. 

IV.  Arnji. — A  small  independent  Moslem  tribe  on  the  left  bank  of  the  EiA'er 
Mola.     It  is  an  offshoot  from  Berisha.     Women  wear  Mirdita  dress. 

Prizren  Group. 
I.  Ljuma. — A  large  and  very  independent  Moslem  tribe. 

Along  with  it  are  grouped,  Bruti,  Mai  i  zi,  Eechi,  Vlas,  and  other  small 
districts.  They  are  all  offshoots,  so  far  as  I  could  learn,  of  various  Clnistian  tribes, 
e.g.,  Shala,  Fandi,  etc. 

Djakova  Group. 

I.  lashi. — 800  houses,  all  Moslem.     Did  not  visit  it. 

II.  Tropopoja. — 300  houses,  all  Moslem. 

III.  Hashi. — Very  large  tribe  vaguely  reckoned  at  from  600  to  1,000  houses. 
Almost  all  Moslem.  Occupies  the  Pestriku  mountains  which  are  the  traditional 
home  of  the  Mirdites  {q.v.).     Are  not  consanguineous  with  Mirdita. 

Djakova  and  its  immediate  neighbourhood  is  almost  entirely  populated  by 
offshoots  from  Berisha,  Shala,  Fandi,  and  Mirdita.  These  all  recognise  consanguinity 
with  their  mother  tribe  and  do  not  intermarry  with  it. 

Ipeh  Group. 

This  consists  of  Ipek,  Gusinje,  and  Plava. 

I  jjjck. — Albanian  population  from  a  number  of  stocks.  In  neighbourhood 
a  number  of  Serb  Orthodox  villages.  Also  Albanian  villages,  some  hailing  from 
Shala  and  Berisha.     At  Dechani,  the  dark  stock  from  Shala  {q.v.). 

II.  Gusinje. — All  Moslem  except  a  small  Serb  Orthodox  population.  Gusinje 
has  never  been  Catholic.  Much  of  the  Moslem  population  can  speak  Serb.  Stock 
very  mixed. 

III.  Plava. — I  did  not  visit.  Said  to  be  of  mixed  stock,  some  from  Hoti  {q.v.), 
some  from  a  very  old  stock  called  Pagani. 


Note  on  the  Tribes  Consanguineous  with  Hoti. 

I.  Krasnich. — I  could  not  visit  this  tribe,  as  it  was  badly  at  blood  with  all  its 
neighbours,  and  objects  also  to  all  foreigners.  It  has  a  powerful  chieftain,  Shaban 
Benaku,  who  traces  direct  descent  from  Krasni  the  brother  of  Geg  Laz,  ancestor  of 
Hoti.  It  is  noteworthy  that  Krasan  is  Serb  for  "  beautiful,"  Krasriik,  "  a  handsome 
man,"  for  the  tribe  stems  from  Bosnia     Also,  that  though  now  all  Moslem  Krasnich 


M.  Edith  Durham.— JTt^A  Albania  and  its  Customs  in  1908.  471 

men  will  go  to  the  Serl)  Monastery  Church  of  Dechani  for  holy  bread,  so  do  the 
Catholics  of  Nikaj  who  are  consanguineous  with  Krasnich.  A  Scutari  ujan,  who 
managed  once  to  penetrate  Krasnich  in  disguise,  told  me  the  plot  of  a  long  ballad 
he  heard  sung  there  which  struck  him  much.  It  is  precisely  the  same  as  one 
published  in  Serb  among  the  collected  ballads  of  Bosnia. 

II.  Pipcri. — In  Montenegro,  all  Orthodox  and  Serbophone  ;  did  not  throw 
in  its  lot  with  Montenegro  till  1790. 

III.  Vasojevich. — Is  since  the  Treaty  of  Berlin  half  Montenegrin  and  half 
under  Turkey.  Is  all  Orthodox  and  Serbophone.  It  is  noteworthy  that  in  the 
Montenegrin  part  many  Albanian  proper  names  occur  with  Serb  terminations, 
e.g.,  Dedich  and  Dedovich.     Ded  =  Domenic  in  Albania. 

Other  Montenegrin  tribes  consanguineous  with  Albanian  ones  : — 
Bijelo  Pavlich. — One  of  the  largest  Montenegrin  tribes,  also  joined  Montenegro 
in  1790.     It  traces  origin  from  Bijelo  Pavlo  (White  Paul),  one  of  the  Dukaghins  of 
Mirdita,  known  in  Mirdita  as  Pal  i  hardh.     The  tribe  is  all  Orthodox  and  Serbo- 
phone. 

Kuchi. — Kuchi  has  been  included  in  Montenegro  since  1877.  It  fought 
on  the  Montenegrin  side  in  the  last  war.  One  of  its  hariaka,  Drekalovich, 
traces  direct  descent  from  Berisha  in  Albania.  It  is  now,  I  believe,  all  Serbo- 
phone. 


Example  of  a  Pedigree  from  Hoti,  High  Albania. 

Geg  Laz  (ancestor  of  the  tribe). 

I 
! 

Djan  Gega.  Djun  Gega.  Laj  Gega  (head  of  Pietro  Ge  (head  of 

I  Eapsha  stock).  Treboina  stock). 

Chek  Djunka. 

Pep  Cheka. 

Vuksan  Pepa. 

I 
Brul  Vuksani. 

Marash  Brula. 

i 
Lek  Marashi. 

I 
Djok  Leka. 

I. 
Hutz  Djoka. 

Marash  Hutzi  (set.  sixty-five,  gave  rue  the  pedigree). 

Zef  Marashi. 

I 
Mark  Zefi. 

I 
Pasko  Marka. 


472  M.  Edith  Durham. — High  Albania  and  its  Customs  in  1908. 


Description  of  Illustration  on  p.  455. 

Fig.  1. — "  Sun  and  moon  "  chair,  Shela. 
„     2. — Variant  design  of  arm  end. 
„     3. — Cross-terminating  in  "  suns,"  Thethi. 

„     4. — Series  of  common  wooden  crosses  showing  all  stages  of  pattern, 
jj     5. — Wooden  headpost  and  head  and  footposts  of  Moslem  graves  (Hashi  and  Puka). 


Description  of  Plate  XXXI. 

Fig.  1. — Nos.  1-7.     Tattoos  common  among  the   Christians  of  the  tribes  of  Maltsia  e 
madhe,  N.  Albania. 
„     8-11.     Common  tattoos  (Roman  Catholic),  Bugojuo,  Bosnia. 
„     12-17.     More  elaborate  examples  from  Jaju,  Bosnia. 
„     18-23.     Bosnian  tattoos  collected  by  Dr.  Truhieka — 
No.  18.     The  ear  of  corn. 
„     19.     "  Ograda,"  the  palisade. 
„     20.     "  Kolo,"  the  circle. 
„     21.     The  moon. 
Nos.  22,  23.     The  cross. 
„     2. — Gravestones   in  Roman  Catholic  graveyard,  Dushmani,  N.  Albania  (showing 
variants  of  cross,  crescent,  and  sun — all  recent). 


[^Repri7ifed  from  the  Journal  of  the  Royal  Jnthropological  Institute,  Vol.  XL,  July-December,  1910.] 


Sarrison  and  Sons,  Printers  in  Ordinary  to  Sis  Majesty,  St.  Martin's  Lane,  London. 


Journal  of  the  Soyal  Anthropological  Institute,  Vol.  XL,  1910,  Plate  XXXI. 


l^w/. 


&f« 


's^\.' 


< 


4^M 


■h 


^^-1 


University  of  California 

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388 

Return  this  material  to  the  library 

from  which  it  was  borrowed. 


MARIO  2000.^^ 


BOTAL    ANTHROPOLOGICAL    INSTITUTE    OF    GREAT 
BRITAIN  ANO  IRELAND. 


This  Institute  was  established  in  1871  by  the  amalgamation  of  the  older 
Anthropological  Society  and  Ethnological  Society.  It  has  for  its  object  the 
promotion  of  the  Science  of  Mankind — Anthropology — by  the  accumulation  of 
observations  bearing  on  man's  past  history  and  present  state  in  all  parts  of  the 
globe.  It  investigates,  in  a  rigorously  exact  manner,  everything  that  can  throw 
light  upon  the  laws  of  man's  nature :  his  origin,  history,  and  capabilities  of 
progressive  development  and  civilisation.  It  studies  him  structurally  and 
psychologically,  under  the  several  types  in  which  he  is  found  in  various  regions ; 
and  comparatively,  in  relation  to  the  rest  of  the  animal  kingdom.  The  ultimate 
object  of  the  Institute,  therefore,  is  to  build  up  a  Science  of  Man  on  a  basis  of 
well-ascertained  fact,  and  logically  deduced  inference.  As  means  to  this  end,  the 
Council  of  the  Institute  has  adopted  a  plan  of '  operations,  the  principal  heads  of 
which  are  as  follow : — 

1.  Meetings  for  the  reading  of  papers  and  for  discussio^xi^  anthropological 

questions.  '''"i^y:, 

2.  The  issue  of  a  Journal  containing  Reports  of  the  Prbqeedings  at  the 

Meetings,  with  other  matters  of  anthropological  interest. 

3.  The  appointment  of  Local  Correspondents  in  all  parts  of  the  world 

to  collect  inform|ytioB^>^d  to  aid  the  Institute  in  its  operations. 

4.  The  maintenance  of  a"  library,  which  contains  sets  of  all  the  principal 

Anthropological  Journals  published  in  the  United  Kingdom  or 
elsewhere,  besides  a  large  and  valuable  collection  of  books  of 
reference,  travels  and  researches,  an  extensive  collection  of  photo- 
graphs and  lantern  slides,  and  much  unpubKshed  material  for  the 
use  of  students  of  Anthropology.  Pellows  residing  in  the  country,  as 
well  as  in  London,  can  borrow  books  from  the  library. 

5.  The  appointment  of  Committees  to  conduct  special  investigations,  as 

occasion  offers,  in  the  various  branches  of  Anthropology. 

6.  Co-operation  with  the  British  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science, 

and  with  foreign  scientific  societies  in  anthropological  investigations ; 

co-operation  with  individuals  and  institutions  in  aid  of  explorations 

and  in  the  establishment  of  local  centres  of  anthropological  study; 

and,  generally,  the  stimulation  of  individual  and  local  efforts  to  further 

the  objects  of  the  Institute. 
The  annual  subscription  is  Two  Guineas,  which  is  due  on  election  (unless 
such  election  takes  place  in  the  month  of  November  or  December)  and  on  the  Ist 
of  January  in  each  succeeding  year.    A  Member  may  at  any  time  compound  his 
future  subscriptions  by  the  payment  of  £31  10s. 


Persons  who  wish  to  become  Fellows  of  the 
Institute  are  requested  to  communicate  with  the 
Secretary,  50,  Great  Russell  Street,  W.C. 


Universi 

South 

Libr; 


