


8919 PEGE [92] 5 


m IAIN HN 


OE 9 genera 
eee eae en te σι. δ 


aoe > 





Ν "δῶν a ρρλτινλξ μος, 














~*~ 








ἢ 





TRAVELS 


IN 


NORTHERN GREECE. 


BY 


WILLIAM MARTIN LEAKE, 


LATE LIEUTENANT-COLONEL OF THE ROYAL ARTILLERY, 
HON. D.C.L. IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD, 
F.R.S. 
ONE OF THE VICE-PRESIDENTS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF LITERATURE, 
AND OF THE ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY, 
MEMBER OF THE ROYAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES AT BERLIN, 


AND CORRESPONDING MEMBER OF THE ROYAL INSTITUTE OF PARIS. 


IN FOUR VOLUMES. 


VOL. I. 


LONDON: 
J. RODWELL, NEW BOND STREET. 


1835, 





ἈΠ’ ΤᾺ ΠῚ 





Se OOH D 


to i 
a 
ti) 
ΝῊ ae eee 
4 ‘7 oN + iw Gas Ὁ: 
Ἐν ὙΠ as Oe 
ῥ i \ ὩΣ: > ᾿ ᾿ς 
. 
ὶ 
; 


LONDON 3.55 0 \pesomeegs 


GILBERT N RIVINGTON, PRINTERS, | 
ST. JOHN’S SQUARE. ee.’ fag 


PREFACE. 


AuttHoucH the Four Journeys in Northern Greece 
which form the subject of these Volumes, are not 
strictly consecutive, in order of time, to the two 


Journeys, which constituted my ‘‘ Travels in the 


99 


Moréa,”’ the present Work is in all other respects 
a continuation of the former, on the same plan; 
and the Preface of those volumes will equally 


apply to these. 


If the diurnal record of the traveller be not 
always the form of narrative most agreeable to the 
reader, it is, or ought to be, more faithful than any 
other, and consequently more useful to those who | 
visit the countries described, especially when those 
countries have been little explored. That form, 
therefore, has been continued in these volumes, 
though the length of time which has elapsed since 
the Journeys were undertaken has justified the 


omission of many observations, which would now 


vl PREFACE. 


appear trifling, and may have given to those which 
are left no more interesting character than that of 
a memoir in aid of history, serving also to exem- 
plify manners and language, in which little or no 
change has yet been effected by the new political 


state of a part of Greece. 


Ancient history and geography having been the 
Author’s chief objects, their illustration occupies 
a large portion of the work; and, in consequence 
of its form, the remarks upon them are introduced, 
I must confess, with little observance of order or 
connexion. The only remedy for this inevitable 
defect was a copious Index. The opinions on those 
subjects were generally formed upon the spot, on 
a careful examination of the ancient testimonies, 
by means of portable editions of the works which 
more particularly treat of Greece, or by extracts 
from others, made previously to the several jour- 
neys. It has indeed happened occasionally, that a 
new light has been thrown upon such questions by 
authorities of less frequent occurrence, to which 1 
had no access when in Greece ; but in these cases 
I have not thought it necessary to refer to the 


circumstance when citing the author, as it has no 


PREFACE. Vili 


effect upon the conclusion, and cannot be of any 


interest to the reader. 


The general map appended to these Volumes has 
been constructed like that which accompanied my 
“ὁ Travels in the Moréa,”’ from the measurement of a 
great number of angles with the sextant or theo- 
dolite from every eligible station, which was acces- 
sible to me, no opportunity having been omitted of 
obtaining a complete triangle, when circumstances 
admitted of it. In applying these geometrical 
observations, I have had the benefit of some valu- 
able information from John Hawkins, Esquire, of 
Bignor Park, in Sussex, who has had the kindness 
to communicate to me some important angles mea- 
sured by him from the summits of the mountains 
Ossa and Pelium, and from two other stations in 
the eastern part of Thessaly. The coast-line has 
throughout been copied or corrected from the 
Admiralty surveys, executed under the direction of 
Captains Smyth and Copeland, of the Royal Navy, 
of which those made under the orders of the lat- 
ter officer are still unpublished. For this assist- 
ance | am indebted to His Majesty’s Hydrographer, 
Captain Beaufort. 


Vill PREFACE. 


In the interior country, the Journal will sufhi- 
ciently distinguish the parts examined by me, from 
those in which the defects of distant or partial 
observations could be supplied only by such oral 
information as can be gathered from an ignorant 
and uneducated people. It is scarcely necessary 
to add, that in these parts the map is to be con- 


sidered only as a first approximation. 


Many circumstances of no public interest have 
retarded the appearance of these volumes, far be- 
yond my wish and intention. The delay, however, 
has afforded me the means of marking on the map 
the boundary-line, which, for the present, forms 


the continental frontier of liberated Greece. 


Lonpon, 
December, 1835. 


CONTENTS 


VOLUME I. 


CHAPTER I. 


FIRST JOURNEY. 


EPIRUS. 
PAGE 
Arrival on the coast of Albania—Avléna, Aulon—Kanina—Eri- 
kh6, Oricum—River Celydnus—Sazona Island, Sason—Acro- 
ceraunia—Palasa, Palestus—Aspri Ruga—Corfa—FortySaints, 
Onchesmus or Anchiasmus — Nivitza — Délvino — Morzena — 
Theriakhates — Arghyrékastro — Valiaré Khan — Labovo — 
Tepeléni — Aot Stena—Bantza — Course of the Vidsa below 
Tepeléni — Family and Court of Aly Pasha............ «2+. 1 


CHAPTER II. 


EPIRUS. 


Return from Tepeléni— Lizati — Stepézi — Dhryndpoli — River 
Bélitza — Kardhiki—The Gulimidhes—Zulati—Pass of Skar- 
fitza—Sénitza—Paleavli—Délvino—Finiki, Phenice—Capiture 
of Phenice by the Illyrians—Helicranum—Antigoneta—Phanote 
—Eleus — Hadrianopolis — Dryinopolis—The Argyrini — Sail 
from the Forty Saints to Port Palérimo—Ltikovo—Pikérnes— 
Sopoté — Kieperé — Khimara, Chimera—-Khimariote towns : 
their troops, manners, &c.—Return by sea to the Forty Saints 
—Hexamili—Tetranisa—Cassiope— Posidiwm—The Livari or 
fishery — Buthrotum ; port Pelodes — Lake, river, bay, and 
district of Vutzindré—Lake Riza—Geography of the coast of 
Epirus opposite to CorfG...,.......+.. ἀρ ει, maior si 56 


ae 


X CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER III. 


SECOND JOURNEY. 


ATOLIA. 

PAGE 
Landing at Var4ssova—Galata—River Evenus—Bokhéri—Caly- 
don, Chalcis, Taphiassus, Macynia — Mesolonghi — Pleuron, 
Proschium, Pylene—Khierésovo—Mount Zygés, Aracynthus— 
Ston-gambo—Vrakhéri — Chorography of Karlii—Kévelo— 
Vlokhé — Thermus — Mount Panetolicum — River Ermitza— 
Zapandi—River Aspro, Achelous—Stratus — Lepeni— Capture 
of Thermus by Philip son of Demetrius—Metapa, Conope, Lysi- 
machia, Olenus, lake Hyria, Acre, Trichonium, Phyteum, Agri- 

nium, 7 δ αὐτὰς oislasdekd Ἀν στα ee « Poeuee >. 106 


CHAPTER IV. 


ACARNANIA, EPIRUS. 


Departure from Lepeni—Kekhreniétza—Kekhreni4d—AmvrakiA 
—Sparto—Stanu— Kervasar4a—Spartovini—Limnea—Lutriéki 
—Balimbey—Vo6nitza—Punta, Actiwm—Prévyza—Port Vathy 
—Ex-Venetian places—Nicopolis—-Mikhalitzi, hill of Apollo— 
Sail from Prévyza to Salaghéra — Arta, Ambracia—— River 
Arachthus—Siege of Ambracia by Fulvius—Ambracus—Craneia 
OTE «τ 0s vine. mops oan » niga eri ene δ: τυ. oes 3.97 


CHAPTER V. 
EPIRUS. 


Route from Arta to lo4nnina— Maraéti—Khandépulo — Strivina— 
Kometzadhes—K oliadhes—Muliana—Pendepigadhia—Varlam 
— Mount Olytzika — Pesté — Ai Dhimitri — Ioannina — De- 
parture for Suli— Rapsista —Variadhes— Tervitziané — River 
Lakiétiko—Romanates—Suli—Kughni—Kukia—Ai Dhonato 
—Samoniva—Kidfa—Bira or Trypa—The Hill of Lightning— 
Mountain of Tzikurétes—Klistra—River Acheron — Fanari— 
Glyky—Wars of the Suliotes— Departure from Kiafa — Ava- 
riko—Seritziana—Zermi—Zerlia—Arass6—K utzanépulo—Ka- 
marina—Zélongo—Ruins of Cassope—Luro—Kantza—Lélovo 
—River of St. George—Aqueduct of Nicopolis—St. George— 
Koliadhes—Pendepigadhia—Return to Ioannina .. ..+..«0. 218 


CONTENTS. XI 


CHAPTER VI. 


EPIRUS, MACEDONIA. 


PAGE 

Ancient remains near Dhramisitis — Kalarytes— Syrako— Viliza 
Matziki—Mount Kakardhista— Prospect from the summit — 
Departure from Ioannina for Greventa—Dhrysko—Dhipotamo 
—Gotzista—Khrysovitza—Tria Khania—Métzovo—Beratéri— 
Pass of Djankirtara—Mount Citiwum—March of Perseus from 
Elimeia to Stratus — Milia — Kranié — Kieperé—River Vene- 
tik6 — Grevené —' River Vistritza, or Injékara, Haliacmon — 
Siatista —Klisura of Lara Pet, ce of 
memo σ DOME... 6. «200 ee et cc eee te heat 200 


CHAPTER VII. 


MACEDONIA. 


River Pramoritza — Sélitza — Sisani — Mount Siniétziko—Bog- 
hatzikoé—Anaselitza— Bobishti — Smighes— Kastoria— Lake 
— Celetrum — Kripista — Zelogésh — Kapesnitza — Devél — 
Biklista — Klisara of Tzangén — Pliassa—Korytza—Candavia 
—Votskép—Moskh6époli—Lavdhari — Rivers Khelidhéni and 
Devol— Mounts Ostrovitza, ‘Opari, Lénia —Dishari — Kom- 
méno-lithari— Dombréni — Mount Tomér—Village of Tomér 
— Tomoritza — Descent to Berét — River Uzimi — Berat, or 
Beligrad—Vezir Ibrahim—Mount Spiraégr—Antipatria ...... 316 


CHAPTER VIII. 


ILLYRIA, EPIRUS. 


From Berat to Apollonia—Plain of Topalti —Vakopéli — Dona- 
fr6s—Liari— Stafiri— River Iénitza — Radostin — Monastery 
of Pollina — Poghiani — Apollonia — Amantia, Byllis, Oricum 
—Rivers Aous, Celydnus, and Polyanthes—Nympheum—Return 
to Berat—and to Ioannina — River Uzimi—Totjer—Venakés 
Mount Trebusin—Klistira—Aoi Stena—Defeat of Philip by T. 
Quinctius—Mounts ropus and Asnaus—Premedi — Zagoria, 
Kieperia, Eleisa—Tjersova—Mount Nemértzika—Ostanitza— 
Pyrrhi Castra, and retreat of Philip thither — Konitza— Rivers 


ΧΙ CONTENTS. 


PAGE 
Vidsa and Voidhomati—Mavrovéini—Pogéghiani— Ravéni— 
Retreat of Philip from Pyrrhi Castra to Mount Lingon—Sources 
of the River Kalama—Kalbaki—Lykéstomo—lIoénnina ..... 363 


CHAPTER IX. 
EPIRUS, THESSALIA. 


Departure from Ioannina—Dhrysko—River Arta—Tria Khania 
— Métzovo — Passage of the Zygos — Sources of the Salam- 
vria—Khan Malakassi—Khan Kotovazdhi—River of Klinovo 
—Metéora— Kalabaka or Staghis, Mginium — Illustrations of 
ancient history — Mount Kotziaka — Trikkala, river Letheus, 
Tricca—Khassia — Kardhiki— Kolokoté6—Tzighiéti—Grisano 
—Zarko—River Salamvria, Peneius—Alifaka—Larissa— Cran- 
nonia —- River Fersaliti, or Enipeus — Férsala, Pharsalus— 
Vrysia — Ghynekékastro, Proerna — Dhomoko, Thaumaci — 
Plain of Taukli—Xynia, lake Xynias— Maliac forest — Furka 
Dervéni—Arrival ‘at. ZitG@ni ": «᾽ς 00s) sled alee ον το σε τ eee 409 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


Notes Chapter I.—1. Biography of Aly Pasha ............ 462 
2. On the Valiaré Khan ........ od tl 407 
3. On Arghyro kastro .. ..0+....-se0ce0 499 

Note to ChapterIV.—1. On the plan of WNicopolis by Mr. 
Donaldson ........ ΠΡ 55. ...801 
Notes to Chapter V.—1. On Suli .......... os ces cc cpus stemmn 


2. On Ῥ αΥῖρα, δον. ee 


ERRATA, VOL. I. 


Page 9, note, fur Roman read Romaic 

— 49, line 15, &c. for Velagrada read Velégrada 

— 108, ne 2, 25. p. 111,1.5. for Fidhari read Fidharo or Fidhaéri, bidapos or 

toaptoyv 

— 112, note 5, line 27, for Κοιλὰ Kila read Κοῖλα, Kila 

— 189, line 6, for North-west read West 

— 202, — 15, for Postikias read Kostakiis 

— 303, — 17, for φωρτώμενα read φωρτωμένα 

— 425, — 16, for Voidéva read Voivéda 

— 432, note 1, for 'Τζιγότι read Τζιγιότι 

— 4057, line 7, for Θαυμάκον read Θαυμακοῦ. In the note, last line, dele 17. 


ERRATA, VOL. UL. 


Page 95, line 11, for passing read seen 
— 95, note 1, for δρύκων read δράκων 
— 422, note 1, last τὰ oe 8. 394 KE. read 8. 49 καὶ E. 
— 436, line 7, for 6°. North of West read 6°. West of North 
— 438, — 25, for opening read ridge 
— 476, — 22, for a narrow valley of the Kanavari read the narrow, &c. 


ERRATA, VOL. III. 


Page 42, line 2, for ten read six 
— 68, — 2, the word ““ narrowest” belongs to the end of the next line 
— 89, — 13, for could be decyphered read could not be decyphered 
— 136, note 2, for μυλάρια read μονλάρια 
— 210, line 15, p. 211, 1. 27, p. 212, 1. 10, 23, for Megabyzus read Megabazus 
— 313, he ΣΝ 1, line 11, for Dyrrhachio, Clodiana 31, read Dyrrhachio Clo- 
iana 4 
— 350, note, for ἹΡαψάνη read ‘Pawan 
— 454, line 27, for Lydias read Axius 
— 463, note 2, for Diodor. 1. 19. read Diodor. 1. 16. 
— 505, line 23, after Babini, Makhera and Khrysovitzi, lying in that order from, 
Jor South-East to North-West read from North to South 
— 511, in the last line, after the monastery read of Lygovitzi 


ERRATA, VOL, IV. 


Page 21, note 2, supply the-words Maxaras ἐπόησε before the verses of the inscrip- 
tion cited from Meletius, the reference to whose work ought to be ii. 290, 
__ hot ii. 250 
— 167, lines 17, 18, for the name of the district and of many of the villages, read 
only the names of many of the villages 
— 167, line 19, dele great 
— 179, — 7, for the shore on either side read the shore to the Eastward 
— 348, — 9, wfter Cassander read by whom they were speedily retaken 
— 365, — 12, for in a line with Férsala read in the road to Feérsala 
— 400, — 1 of the note, being part of note 1 of p. 399, for Αἰσωσίδα read 
_ Aicwvida 
— 435, — 28, for valley read village 
Index, page 1, line penult. for 252 read 257. 






Pinta eM: 
Ἷ ᾿ Meme 6 eA tal Ad, τ 
wey 6 re 


Ue ® RAE po VR Bet (ea 


‘ Ἷ ; hai ᾿ 
ἌΝ ΜΝ RES Ota ot oe Cee ee et ᾿ ἦν ἢ 
- hy r ᾿ 





ih f 


‘ ‘ 
. ὶ 
‘ 
ξ » 
- ΑΙ 
- 
᾿ 
- 
ν᾿ 
‘ ἡ ¢ 
᾿ 
γν: 
j ; 
ἃ “Ὶ : 
( 
winnie 
Δ Γ ᾿ 
Π 
* if¢ 
° 
’" id Pe x 
i_— δὰ 
ἘΣ Ἶ ay pat Gree 
ae ᾿ ἢ > δ vA AYE +5 
Φ' “> 
rs) 
. 
Fad J 
? / 
iz ‘ 
Brey > a 
a | 
‘ 
a i * 
᾿ς 
¥ 


DIRECTIONS FOR BINDING. 


The Maps, Plans, and Inscriptions to be arranged at the end of the Four 
Volumes, as follows :— 


AT THE END OF VOL. I. 


The general Map of Northern Greece. 
Plan of Nicopolis. 

Plan of Suli. 

Inscriptions—Plates I. II. III. 


AT THE END OF. VOL. II. 
Plan of Thermopyle. 
Map of Beotia. 
Plan of Platea. 
Plan of Delphi. 
Inscriptions—Plates from IV. to XXIII. inciusive. 


AT THE END OF VOL, III. 
Map of Ithaca. 
Map of Macedonia, P@onia, &c. 
Inscriptions—Plates from XXIV. to XX XIII. inclusive. 


AT THE END OF VOL. IV. 
Plan of Thebes. 


Inscriptions—Plates from XXXIV. to XLIV. inclusive. 


}} 


αι ol 


ΣΕ Ἃ. 





TRAVELS 


IN 


NORTHERN GREECE. 


FIRST JOURNEY. 


CHAPTER I. 
EPIRUS. 


Arrival on the coast of Albania —Avléna, Aulon — Kanina— 
Erikhé, Oricum—River Celydnus—Sazona Island, Sason— 
Acroceraunia — Palasa, Palestus —~ Aspri Ruga — Corfi — 
Forty Saints, Onchesmus or Anchiasmus—Nivitza—Délvino 
—Morzena—Theriakhates—Arghyrékastro—Valiaré Khan— 
Labovo—Tepeléni—Aor Stena—Bantza—Course of the Vidsa 
below Tepeleni—Family and Court of Aly Pasha. 


Dec. 9, 1804.—Aulon, which preserves its ancient 
name in the usual Romaic form of Avléna’, con- 
verted by the Italians into Valona, is about a mile 
and a half distant from the sea-beach, and has 
eight or ten minarets. On the sea side there is a 
tolerable wharf, with an apology for a fort, in the 
‘shape of a square inclosure of ruinous walls, with 


‘! Αὐλῶνας. 


VOL. 1. B 


2 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


towers and a few cannon. The town occupies a 
hollow thickly grown with olive trees, among which 
are some gardens of herbs mixed with cypresses, 
poplars, and fruit trees. Beyond, are rugged hills 
entirely covered with olives, and to the northward 
a woody plain extending for a considerable dis- 
tance, and forming a low shore except just at the 
northern entrance of the gulf, opposite to the island 
Sazona, where are some white cliffs of small eleva- 
tion separated from the plain by a lagoon, con- 
taining salt works and a fishery. 

Two miles southward of the town rises a steep 
hill, on the suinmit of which is the ruinous castle 
of Kanina, and on a ridge branching from it to the 
southward the scattered houses of a Turkish village 
of the same name overtopped by two small mina- 
rets. Kanina is a name which occurs in the By- 
zantine history’. It was built upon a Hellenic 
site, as appears by some remains of masonry of 
that age among the walls. Not far to the south- 
ward of the height of Kanina, begins a range of 
steep mountains separated only by a narrow valley 
from the Acroceraunia, which mountain presents 
the same forbidding aspect on this side as towards 
the sea, and forms a narrow steep ridge, woody, 
rocky, and terminating in a sharp summit which 
closes the valley about ten miles from the ex- 
tremity of the gulf. This valley is a part of the 
district of Khimara, and contains a large village 
named Dukai, in Greek Dukadhes, below which 
at the southern extremity of the gulf is the har- 


1 Anna Comn. ]. i. p. 34. Paris.. 


I. | EPIRUS. | 3 


bour named Pashaliman by the natives, and Porto 
Raguséo by the Italians, near the mouth of a river 
which flows from the peak of the Acroceraunia 
through the valley of Dukadhes. Eastward of the 
mouth of the river is a succession of lagoons, in 
the midst of which are the ruins of Oricum, on a 
desert site now called Erikho'—the last syllable ac- 
cented as in the ancient word, and E substituted 
for O, which was not an uncommon dialectic 
change among the ancients. The river of Du- 
kadhes would seem from Ptolemy to have been 
the Celydnus, although its position does not exactly 
agree with his order of names, which places the 
Celydnus between Aulon and Oricum’. Porto 
Raguséo I take to be the Panormus which Strabo 
describes as the port of Oricum ὅ. 

The gulf of Avlona being surrounded, for the 
most part, by high mountains, is subject to sudden 
and violent squalls. When the wind blows strong 
from the westward, the road of Avléna is not con- 
sidered safe, and the usual anchorage is under 
Sazona, the ancient Sason, notorious among the 
Romans as a station of pirates*. This island is most 
conveniently placed to shelter this great bay just 
at the mouth of the Adriatic, and affords a safe en- 
trance on either side into the bay ; for the cliffs in 
front of the lagoons of Avléna, the island itself, and 
the cape which forms the extreme point of the Acro- 


* Anna Comnena writes vey αὐτοῦ ὁ Πάνορμος καὶ τὰ 


Ἱεριχὼ, p. 34. 389. Κεραύνια ὄρη, &c. Strabo, 
2 Ptolem. 1. 3, δ, 13, 14. p- 316. 
> Mera δ᾽ ᾿Απολλωνίαν Bud- > Bin Hy Ν.]. 8, δα ἤηπ, 


λιακὴ καὶ ᾿Ωρικὸν, καὶ τὸ ἐπί- 


B2 


4 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


ceraunian ridge, are all equally bold. The latter 
remarkable promontory is now called Glossa (per- 
haps its ancient name), and by the Italians Lin- 
guetta. The depth of the gulf between Sazona and 
Avléna is from 10 to 15 fathoms, and towards the 
southern extremity much greater, except near Ori- 
cum, where, as well as near Avlona, the depth is from 
2 to 4 fathoms. Every where the bottom is a tough 
mud, deposited from the surrounding mountains. 
Among a few ships now lying in the road of Avlona, 
is a Ragusan vessel loading fossil pitch from the 
mine mentioned by Strabo’. The mountain, at the 
foot of which this mineral is found, is about three 
hours to the eastward of Avlona, and being con- 
spicuous from off the coast, is marked in the Italian 
charts under the name of Montagna della Pegola- 
Its real name is Kuadhesi. Another ship is from 
Constantinople, bound to Palermo with corn; a 
third, which has been three months from Venice, 
is of the species of Adriatic vessels called a Pielago, 
which differs not much from the Manzera and Tra- 
baccolo. It has a main-mast of a single stick from 
Fiume, almost as large as the main-mast of our 
ship’, and twice as long. These vessels make 
quick passages with a fair wind, but are very unfit 
to contend with the Etesian breezes of summer, 
and still less with the equally obstinate and much 
more violent southerly gales in the autumn and 
winter. In the month of October, 1802, I made a 
passage of ten days in one of these vessels, from 
Corfu to Trieste, through the Dalmatian islands, 


1 Strabo, p. 316, * H.M. Sloop Bittern, Capt. Corbett. 


I. | EPIRUS. 5 


touching at several of them in the way. In the 
present season it is not uncommon for them to be 
four months in making the passage in the opposite 
direction between the two ports. During the 
Etesian winds in summer, instances often occur of 
these vessels putting into the Rhizome Gulf, or 
Bocche di Cattaro, with a contrary wind, when 
the masters proceed to Venice by land, make an 
agreement for the disposal of their cargo, and re- 
turn to the Bocche before the ship has sailed. In 
the winter the Bocchesi seldom pass their gulf, but 
leaving a man and boy aboard, join their families 
on shore, and there remain till the spring. 

Dec. 10.—Having sailed out of the gulf in the 
night with a light breeze at north, we speak a 
vessel from Alexandria bound direct to Tunis, with 
pilgrims returning from Mecca. 

Dec. 11.—At noon at the foot of the Acrocerau- 
nian peak, on the slope below which stands the 
village Palasa, a name resembling that of the place 
where, according to Lucan, Cesar landed from 
Brundusium previously to his operations against 
Pompey in Illyria’, but which Cesar names 
Pharsalus*. There can be little doubt that, in 


ys eh CU Ch Ce ὑπ ἀπον π6' Ceraunia nautis. 
Inde rapi ccepere rates atque eequora classem 
Curva sequi, quze jam vento fluctuque secundo 
Lapsa Palzestinas uncis confixit arenas. 
Lucan. Pharsal. 1. 5, v. 457. 


* Postridie terram attigit adversariis arbitrabatur ad eum 
Cerauniorum. Saxa inter et locum, qui appellatur Pharsa- 
alia loca periculosa, quietam lus omnibus navibus ad unam 
nactus stationem et portus incolumibus, milites exposuit. 
omnes timens, quos teneri ab —Cesar de B. Civ. 1. 3, ¢. 6. 


6 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


this instance, the poet is more correct than the 
great captain, who was so negligent of geography, 
(in Greece at least), that he has not named the 
place in Thessaly, where he gained the greatest 
of all his victories: so that this is the only passage 
in the commentaries where the word Pharsalus 
occurs. Cesar’s chief consideration in selecting 
his place of debarkation on this coast, was to avoid 
the harbours likely to be in the hands of the enemy, 
and to make himself master of Oricum, Apollonia, 
and Dyrrhachium, before Pompey could arrive 
from Macedonia. Trusting, therefore, to his pro- 
tecting fortune to carry him through the perils 
both of the enemy and the season, he embarked 
seven legions and six hundred cavalry at Brundu- 
slum, in ships of burthen, for want of any others, 
arrived on the day after his departure at the 
Ceraunia, where he found a quiet station for the 
ships in the midst of rocks and dangerous places ; 
and having immediately landed his troops, sent 
back the ships to Italy the same night. By this 
promptitude, Pompey arrived from Candavia in 
time only to save Dyrrhachium. Appian, though 
he does not specify in what part of the Ceraunian 
mountains the landing was made, shows that it 
was very near to Oricum, for he agrees with Cesar 
in representing Oricum to have been taken within 
a day from the time of the landing’: he adds that 
Cesar marched by night; that on account of the 
rugged and difficult country, he divided his forces 
into several bodies, which were reunited at day- 
break, and that the Oricii having declared their 


* Appian. de Bel. Civ. 1. 2, c. 54.—Cesar, |. 3, ο. 11. 


1. | EPIRUS. 7 


unwillingness to resist the Roman Consul, the 
commander of the garrison delivered up the keys 
to Cesar. The distance of the site of Oricum from 
the shore below Palasa, seems perfectly to agree 
with these circumstances; and there is in fact a 
small harbour below Palasa, though it seems 
rather diminutive for the force which Cesar dis- 
embarked. 

The Strada Bianca, so called in the Italian 
charts, and known to the Greeks by the synonym 
Aspri Ruga, is a broad torrent-bed very conspicu- 
ous at sea, which, originating in the summit of 
the mountain of Palasa, descends directly to the 
sea to the northward of that village. To the 
southward of Palasa is a succession of villages on 
the side of the mountain, as far as the entrance of 
the Channel of Corfa, all formerly belonging to 
the Khimariote league ; but these, from Port Pale- 
rimo southward, are now in the hands of Aly Pasha. 
Khimara, which now gives name to the Acrocerau- 
nian range, is a town, a little to the northward of 
Port Palérimo, the ancient Panormus, described 
by Strabo as a harbour in the midst of the Ce- 
raunian mountains ’. 

The great summit at the ΜῊΝ end of Corft, 
named Pandokratora, and by the Italians Butcater, 
is now a conspicuous object to the south by east, and 
a little to the eastward of it the northern Cape of 
Corfa, named St. Catherine. Masléra and Salma- 
straki are in a line off the north west Cape of Corfu, 
and farther eastward ᾿Οθωνοὺς ( Ltal. Fanu ), forming 


' Strabo, p. 324. 


8 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


an equilateral triangle with the two former. Otho- 
nus, or Othronus, is an ancient name’, and appears 
from Procopius to have been applied in the plural 
number to all the three islands’. 

Dec. 13th to 20th.—In quarantine at Corfa, in 
consequence of the fever at Gibraltar. The qua- 
rantine ground is a small level space on the shore 
below the gate of the city, which still bears the 
French inscription Porte d’Epire, but by the 
Greeks is called the gate of St. Nicolas, from a 
small church which, with an adjoining apartment, 
is the only building on the ground. St. Nicolas 
is the patron of sailors, and his churches are often 
found near the shore. His feast-day being on the 
18th, the priest and his deacons were employed 
for two or three days previously in weaving gar- 
lands of myrtle to adorn the pictures, and in pre- 
paring branches of bay and myrtle to stick about 
the walls of the church. 

Dec. 20.—From the quarantine at eleven A. M. 
I cross over to the Forty Saints, a harbour on the 
Epirote coast, in an open boat, which carries a 
cargo of oranges and lemons ; these fruits, with figs, 
rice, and oil, form the export trade of Corfa with 
the Skala* of the Forty Saints, from whence are 
brought in return, grain, fish, botargo, cattle, and 


' Plin. 1. 4, c. 12, Schol. lian language, and is used in 


Lycophron. v. 1027, 1034.— 
Stephan. in”O@pwvoc. 

2 Procop. de B. Goth. 1. 4, 
6: 22. 

5. Σκάλα, in Turkish Iskéle, 
has been adopted from the Ita- 


every part of the Levant to 
signify a port of trade, from the 
largest commercial city, to a 
place where a single magazine 
is sufficient for the traffic of the 
coast. 


I. | EPIRUS. 9 


wood. We row over in six hours, against a light 
adverse air. 

Kyr G. Z., to whom I have a letter of recom- 
mendation from our minister, is collector of the 
customs of the Forty Saints, which is the chief 
port of Délvino and its district. Having a share 
also in the fishery of Buthrotum, he sells fish, both 
fresh and salted, and retails wine and other com- 
modities imported from Corfa. All these affairs 
are transacted in a small stone building: three- 
fourths of the space within the walls are destined 
to the shop and store which are on the bare ground, 
the remaining fourth, in which he dwells, is sepa- 
rated from the rest by a floor half way up the wall, 
and a wooden partition in front, having two win- 
dows looking down into the store. Around the 
apartment are ranged trunks and shelves contain- 
ing the collector’s property and domestic utensils. 
Among them are some boxes full of salted κεφαλοὶ, 
or grey mullets, making a powerful addition to the 
various odours, none of them very agreeable, which 
are diffused through the apartment. At one end 
is a hearth, but no chimney, the smoke serving, as 
it effects its escape through the tiles, to cure the 
botargo', or roes of the mullet, which, enclosed 
in the natural membrane as extracted from the 
fish, are suspended to the rafters, and after the 
smoking will be dipped in melted wax. The kefalés 
is produced in abundance in all the lagoons and 
lakes of Greece, which like that of Buthrotum have 


‘ αὐγοτάριχον : the Roman form of the ancient ὠὰ τάριχα; 
literally, pickled eggs. 


10 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


a communication with the sea; and the botargo is 
a great resource to the Greeks during the severer 
fasts, when only a bloodless fish diet is allowed. 

Dec. 21.—On the north-western side of the har- 
bour of the Forty Saints are some extensive ruins, 
situated on a gentle slope by the sea side, at the 
foot of the bare rocky hills of which all this part of 
the Epirote coast consists. The ruins are those of 
a town of the better times of the Lower Empire. 
The walls forming an exact semicircle, the diameter 
of which is the sea beach, are flanked by about 
twenty towers; and contain within them the re- 
mains of churches, cisterns, and houses. At present 
the inclosure serves as a fold for the flocks of some 
Albanians, who have left their native mountains, 
now covered with snow, in search of pasture, and 
who are accompanied by their families ; some living 
in tents, others in καλύβια or huts of light materials. 
This is the common practice of the mountaineers of 
northern Greece, the far larger proportion of whom 
are Christians, either of Albanian or Vlakhiote 
race, but the present party are Musulman Liape, 
from the mountains near Tepeléni. 

Between the walls of the ancient town and the 
modern houses of the Liméni, Skala, or Skaloma', 
are the remains of a suburb of the ruined town, 
and close to the houses of the Skala those of a 
large church, which has long been in ruins, but 
still retains the name of its saint, St. Basil?. On 
its southern side are the ruins of a smaller church 
of the same date, sacred to St. Nicolas’. 

“ro λιμένι, ἡ σκάλα, OF τὸ 2 “Αγιος Βασίλειος. 


σκάλωμα. > Αγιος Νικόλαος, 


I. | EPIRUS. 11 


The summit of the hill which rises at the back 
of the Skala is crowned by the ruins of the church 
of the Forty Saints, which gives to this place the 
name of στοὺς ᾿Αγίους Σαράντα. Α village on a 
height, separated only from that of the church by 
a hollow, through which leads the road to Délvino, 
bears the same name, as well as a small square 
white-washed fort to which there is a paved zig-zag 
path leading up the mountain from the Skala. The 
village was built three years ago by Aly Pasha, 
and is peopled by the cultivators and pastors of the 
neighbouring plain, from the former of whom, Aly 
having lately made the land his own, receives a 
third of its produce. The fortress was added this 
summer: it has two round towers at two of the 
opposite angles, and within the walls a dwelling 
for the bulu-bashi'. The church of the Forty 
Saints is said to have been part 
of a monastery, but nothing more 
remains at. present than the ruined 
church, of the annexed form, which 
was covered with three domes and [> | 
seven semi-domes. 

It was evidently coeval with the town below ; 
though part of the materials of the church, par- 
ticularly in the round arches of the windows, are 
Roman tiles, derived probably from some town of 


1 This Turkish title, meaning The Greeks write the word 
the head of a military district, Μπουλουμπὰς, but the Alba- 
is bestowed upon any Albanian nian pronunciation is very like 
commanding a few soldiers.  Bilibash. 


12 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


an earlier age, which stood on the site of the ex- 
isting ruins on the shore of the harbour. At 
Kass6po in Corfa, nearly opposite to the Forty 
Saints, are similar ruins of a town not so large 
as that of the Forty Saints, with those of a castle, 
irregular in shape, and having no ruined buildings 
within its inclosure, and which stands on the sum- 
mit of a hill risimg from the shore of the harbour 
of Kassépo. 

The heights of the Forty Saints are rugged, 
sharp, honey-combed rocks of brown marble, with 
a little soil in the intervals, which bear squills and 
other plants usual on similar sites in Greece. At 
the Skala, a rough mole incloses a little cothon or 
basin sufficient for the use of the small boats which 
alone frequent the harbour, though it would be 
both secure and convenient for large vessels, were 
the commerce of this part of Epirus sufficient to 
require them, as the bay has good anchorage and 
is well protected both from south-easterly and north- 
westerly gales; in the latter direction, by a re- 
markable cape called Kefali', which with Cape 
St. Catherine, or the northern extremity of Corfa, 
forms the entrance of the channel from the north- 
ward ; in the opposite direction the harbour is 
protected by the projecting coasts both of the con- 
tinent and island. ‘To-day, though it blows a gale 
of wind from the southward, there is no sea in 
the port. 

As there is nothing between the Forty Saints 


* Κεφαλή. 


1.] EPIRUS. 13 


and Port Palérimo deserving the name of a har- 
bour, though there are creeks under the villages of 
Nivitza, Lakovo and Pikérnes, where small vessels 
take shelter and are drawn up on the beach, the 
Forty Saints can alone correspond to the ancient Port 
Onchesmus, which was the next to the southward of 
Panormus, according to Ptolemy as well as Strabo’. 
It would seem from Cicero that Onchesmus, in 
his time, was a place of some importance, and that 
it was the ordinary point of departure from Epirus to 
Italy, the south-easterly breeze which was favourable 
for making the passage, having been called an On- 
chesmites*. Under the Constantinopolitan emperors 
the name Onchesmus assumed the form of Anchias- 
mus, which probably obtained the preference over 
Onchesmus in consequence of a tradition noticed 
by Dionysius of Halicarnassus, that the town was 
named after Anchises, father of ποῖα Ὁ. Anchi- 
asmus was a city of the government of Old Epirus, 
together with Phcenice and Buthrotum; the sig- 
nature of the bishops of Anchiasmus is found to 
the acts of the Councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon 
in the fifth century. The other bishops of Epirus 
whose names are annexed to the acts are those of 
Dodona, Nicopolis, Eurhcea, Phcenice, Hadriano- 
polis and Corcyra. 

Dec. 22.—A Scirocco, which detained me yes- 
terday, still continues, but though the gale has 


* Ptolem. 1. 3. c. 14. Strab. nobis flavit ab Epiro lenissimus 


Ῥ. 324. Onchesmites. Cicero ad Attic. 
* Brundusium venimus VII. 1. 7. ep. 2. 
ealend. Decemb. usi tua feli- * Dionys. Ant. Rom. 1. 1. 


citate navigandi. Ita bellé ο. 51. 


14 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


abated and the rain ceased, the Agoiates, (Italice 
vetturini,) are unwilling to go, and my host will 
not take upon himself to oblige them, until some 
person arrives from Délvino, who will report the 
rivers practicable. The consequence is, that 1 am 
not only detained this day, but the 23d Dee. 
likewise ; for although some horsemen arrived 
yesterday, about 3 p.m., who had crossed the 
river, it was then too late to depart, and at night 
the rain set in again in torrents with thunder and 
lightning, penetrating the bare tiles of the col- 
lector’s roof, and pouring down all night a black 
stream from the smoky tiles. The tempest conti- 
nues the greater part of the day, but the wind 
having come to the north promises a change of 
weather. 

The feasts, the fasts, and the fears of the 
Greeks, are a great impediment to the traveller. 
During their feasts they will not work ; the fasts, 
when prolonged and rigidly observed, render them 
unequal to any great exertion, while timidity is 
the necessary consequence of the Turkish yoke 
following long ages of the debasing tyranny and 
superstition of the Byzantine empire. But through 
this unamiable covering the ancient national cha- 
racter continually breaks forth ; to which, in this 
mountainous part of the country, is added a consi- 
derable portion of the industry and activity of a 
northern race. Every traveller will occasionally 
be disgusted with the meanness, lying, and cow- 
ardice of the people, in the towns and in the parts 
of the country most frequented by travellers ; but 
it should be remembered that their vices arise 


ι.} EPIRUS. 15 


from their condition, that deceit is the only de- 
fence which their tyrants have left them, and that 
such defects are greater in proportion to that natu- 
ral genius which is indisputably inherent in the 
race. They have a proverb, that the sweetest 
wine makes the sourest vinegar, which is well ex- 
emplified in their own character by means of a 
most corrupt despotic government acting upon a 
fine natural genius. 

Dec. 24.—-At 10, a.m., we set out in the rain 
from the Liméni, cross the hollow between the 
monastery and the village of the Forty Saints, and 
at the end of three quarters of an hour ford a small 
stream descending from Nivitza into the Pavla, 
which is the principal river of the plain of Délvino. 
The passage of this tributary is so difficult in con- 
sequence of the rain, that there seems little chance 
of the main stream being passable. Our conduct- 
ors, moreover, are ignorant of the πέραμα, or proper 
ford of the latter river; we are obliged therefore 
to follow its bank upwards, until immediately 
below Nivitza we meet a party of horsemen, who 
have been making an attempt to cross without 
success. We retire, therefore, for the night to 
Nivitza. 

The mountain on the mid-slope of which this 
village stands, is separated on either side by a 
valley from the rest of the maritime range, and is 
fortified to the eastward as well by the steepness 
of the mountain as by the rapid river at the foot of 
it. Sorugged is the ascent, and so bad our cattle, 
that we are two hours in reaching the village from 
the river, the mules having fallen several times 

12 


16 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


under their loads. The Vezir’s Bulu-bashi, a rough 
Albanian Musulman, receives us kindly as the 
friends of his master, and we take up our lodging 
at the best Greek house in the place. Many of 
the soldiers and inhabitants speak Italian; one of 
them is son of a major in the Reali Cacciatori 
Albanesi of Naples, in which corps he himself 
served many years. : 

Nivitza was once a large and flourishing town, 
and the most important of the independent Christ- 
ian communities, which then extended along the 
whole coast from Buthrotum to Aulon. By means 
of the strength of its position it resisted all the 
attempts of Aly Pasha to reduce it, until the year 
1798, when he persuaded the French to connive 
at his conveying a body of Albanians in his own 
vessels through the Straits; an operation which had 
constantly been interdicted by the Venetians on 
the strength of their treaties with the Porte, but 
which was conceded on this occasion by the French, 
as they were then anxious to conciliate Aly with a 
view to their designs upon Turkey, and little sus- 
pected perhaps the use which he intended to make 
of their permission. He landed his troops at the 
Skales of Nivitza and the Forty Saints; and the 
better to ensure success, made choice of the morn- 
ing of Easter Sunday for the time of attack, when 
the inhabitants were all disarmed and engaged in 
prayers. He thus made an easy conquest, not 
only of Nivitza, but of two other villages to the 
northward, the possession of which has now given 
him all the coast as far as the town of Khimara. 
Nivitza and the two villages are now little better 


1. | EPIRUS. 17 


than ruins; their lands, divided into portions, are 
numbered among the Pasha’s tjiftliks ; and it is for 
the use of those who cultivate them that the Pasha 
has built the new village of the Forty Saints, 
while many of the inhabitants of Nivitza have 
been sent to labour on his farms near Trikkala in 
Thessaly. | 

Dec. 25.—A mile to the northward of Nivitza, 
on the same mountain, stands Aio Vasili, one of 
the villages which shared the fate of Nivitza: a 
little below it a ridge which connects the mountain 
with the range to the northward, is occupied by a 
small square fortress, similar to that of the Forty 
Saints, and which was erected by the Pasha soon 
after he had obtained possession of Nivitza. About 
a mile below this castle is the Skala of Nivitza and 
St. Basil, called Spilia. The rugged hills below 
Nivitza, to the eastward, are planted with olives 
and vines: the plain produces Mesiri (maize), 
kalambokki’ (Guinea corn), fastlia (kidney-beans), 
rizi (rice), wheat, barley, and tobacco. Having 
descended the mountain, we cross the river at the 
extremity of the plain, near the opening where it 


not much is raised, and that 
chiefly for feeding poultry. 
Mesiri from Mesr (Egypt), 


* The word καλαμπόκκιον 
(derived from its reed-like 
stem καλάμι, and applicable 


therefore to every kind of 
Holeus) is much more com- 
monly applied in Greece to 
maize, or Indian corn, of which 
bread is made in every part of 
the country, than to the Sor- 
gum, or Guinea corn, of which 
VOL: 1. 


which in this part of Albania 
means maize, is a misnomer, 
inasmuch as_ the 
which bread 15 
made in that country, is not 
the maize, but the Guinea- 
cori. 


Durra, of 
commonly 


18 EPIRUS. [CIIAP. 


issues from the mountains: it is not very deep, 
but extremely rapid, and the stony bed is such an 
insecure footing for the horses, that they tremble 
in crossing it. Both horse and rider must trust to 
the guide who walks on foot beside them, supports _ 
both, and repeats his recommendation to the rider 

to look at the bank, and not at the water, which 
causes giddiness. I did not experience that effect, 
but the illusion of appearing to remain stationary, 
while really moving, was perfect. The sources of 
this river are in the mountains eastward of Khi- 
mara, and its course, for the most part, is through 
a narrow valley, in which is situated Kaliasa. 
Half an hour beyond the river, we cross the torrent 
of Délvino, and at noon enter the pass of Délvino, 
from which the torrent flows. Kyr Khristo Kanaki, 
to whom I had letters, happens to be in the country, 
superintending his vineyards, but 1 am received 
in his house, and he returns home in the evening. 
Dhélvino, or Délvino’, is situated in an opening 
of the lower ridges of a high range of mountains 
which have a$.8.E. direction. The town is chiefly 
inhabited by Musulman Albanians, who have eight 
or ten small mosques. Of Greeks who occupy only 
the eastern suburb called Laka, there are about 
thirty families, ten of which bear the same surname 
as Kyr Khristo. The Bishop and K. are the chief 
men; the former, who is now absent, styles him- 
self Bishop of Khimara and Délvino, and is a suf- 
fragan of the Metropolitan of Toannina. The 
Turkish houses occupy the sides of the hills on 


' Δέλβινος, or Ντέλβινος. 
12 


I. | EPIRUS. 19 


either side of the torrent, for a distance of two 
miles, being situated as usual in Albanian towns, 
at great distances from one another, with a view 
to the frequent quarrels and wars among the 
φάραις, or family alliances, into which all Albanian 
communities are divided. The effects of these, 
and of a war between the Pashas Aly and Mustafa, 
which lasted seven years, have left many of the 
houses in ruins. The war ended by putting Aly 
in possession of Délvino, and sending Mustafa to 
take shelter in Tjamuria, where he now resides at 
Vakalates, a small town two or three hours east- 
ward of Buthrotum. 

At the entrance of Délvino, on a conspicuous 
height, stands the deserted serai of Selim Bey 
Koka, a connection of Aly Pasha, but who, having 
taken part with Mustafa, has not thought himself 
safe here, and has retired to Konispoli, where, 
however, he still enjoys the revenue of his landed 
property in the district of Délvino. A little within 
the opening of the hills, a conical rock, projecting 
over the ravine, is crowned with a small castle in 
bad repair. The ground on either side of the 
ravine abounds in springs and streamlets falling 
down to the torrent, and although the most uneven 
imaginable, bears olives and other fruit trees. 
The Pasha’s palace is a heap of ruins, but there 
still remain in the same quarter, on the northern 
side of the town, some good houses, pleasantly 
situated among gardens, in which are orange-trees, 
cypresses, and poplars. The Christians of Délvino 
make wine, and comb and spin some imported 

ez 


20 EPIRUS. [CHAP, 


hemp into yarn, from which they manufacture 
shoes. Swords too, such as the Albanians wear, 
are made here, and every part of their muskets 
except the barrels. Below the castle there is a 
miserable bazar. 

On account of the difficulty of passing the river, 
I had no opportunity of examining a Paleo-kastro 
at Finiki (Φοινίκη), of which I received information. 
The name, however, is sufficient to show it to be 
the Pheenice of Strabo and Polybius, which the 
former describes as being near Buthrotum, and 
which the itineraries place exactly in this position 
between the Acroceraunia and Buthrotum: it 
stood on an insulated hill, in the middle of the 
plain between the river of Kaliasa, and another, 
named Vistritza, which flows from the north- 
east, and beyond Finiki pursues a course nearly 
parallel to the former river, as far as the lake, into 
which they separately fall. 

My host complains to me, in the usual style, of 
the hardships which his nation suffers from the 
Turks, and asks why the great powers of Europe, 
but particularly the English, will not assist in 
liberating their fellow-Christians. It is not a very 
agreeable task to explain, that nations seldom act 
but from self-interest, that we have a cruel war on 
our hands, and that.our present policy is to sup- 
port the Turkish empire. The poor Greeks have 
not much more to hope for at present from any 
other nation. If either French or Russians, in 
their military occupation of the country, were 
obliged io derive their resources from it, the 


1. | EPIRUS. 21 


Greeks might find the necessities of a French or 
Russian general not less fatal to their liberty 
and property than those of Aly, whose officers are 
kept in the best possible order, however relentless 
his own extortion may be. The sentiments of the 
Greeks, as well in this as in other parts of Greece 
which I have visited, show that the conduct of the 
Russians in the Greek expeditions of Catherine, as 
well as in the administration of the Septinsular 
Republic, has left a very unfavorable impression : 
so far from desiring the presence of these brethren 
of their church, as might have been supposed, they 
much more commonly bestow upon them the appel- 
lations of Κλέφτες and Zea. On the other hand, they 
seem quite ready to hail the arrival of the French, 
though they are cautious of giving utterance to 
these sentiments, not so much from any fear of 
their own government, for at this moment they 
have perhaps more liberty of speech upon such 
subjects than any people on the continent of 
Europe; but from doubts lest they should give 
offence to European governments or their agents, 
whose influence with the Turks might be fatal to 
an offending individual. My host admits, that 
were any pretended deliverers to land, there would 
hardly be the Greek who would venture to furnish 
them provisions, much less to join them, so much 
do they dread the Turkish sabre, and so little 
energy have they to act in their own behalf. 

Dec. 26.—At half past eight this morning we 
begin to ascend the mountain at the back of 
Délvino. Its sides are covered with extensive 


22 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


vineyards, yielding a light pleasant wine, but 
which generally turns sour before the sum- 
mer. The pass leads between rugged and barren 
hills, two of the highest summits of the range, 
until, at half past ten, we arrive at the little vil- 
lage of Kardhikaki, where are the sources of one 
of the streams which contribute to form the Vis- 
tritza. Here we fall in with some Musulman 
Albanians, hunting hares with greyhounds of a 
large breed. The peasants are ploughing the 
ground, with a light plough drawn by two oxen ; 
they afterwards break the clods with a hoe. At 
11.10 a hollow country is on our right, four or 
five miles in diameter, surrounded by an amphi- 
theatre of mountains, and watered by several 
streams, which unite to form the Vistritza. The 
slopes, although intersected and broken by the 
torrents in the most rugged, and wildest manner, 
are well clothed with vineyards and olive-trees. 
Having skirted the edge of this basin as far as 
the village of Morzena, we there join the road 
from Vutzindré, which is hardly passable at this 
time on account of the rivers. A little beyond 
Morzena is a Dervéni, or guard-house', in a spot 
where the road begins to descend into the plain of 
Arghyrokastro through a narrow opening between 
two very steep and lofty summits. The descent 
is long and rugged; and it is not until 2 p.m. 


| Ντερβένι. The Greek form Guard-House as well as to the 
of the Turkish word Dervént Defile. 
is applied in Greece to the 


£5] EPIRUS. 23 


that we arrive in the plain at the Dervéni of Gar- 
bitzi, or Grabitza, so called from a small neigh- 
bouring village. Here the opening is no more 
than a torrent-bed between lofty rocks. The 
wretched mules which we took from the Forty 
Saints move so slowly that the horizontal distance 
from Délvino to this place is probably not more 
than 9 geographical miles. Nothing can be less 
inviting or picturesque than the present appear- 
ance of the valley of Arghyrokastro, though un- 
doubtedly it presents a very different. appearance 
im spring, as its numerous villages and extensive 
cultivation show that it is one of the most flourish- 
ing districts in Albania. Those parts which are 
now little better than a marsh in consequence of 
the perfect level, are in summer richly covered 
with corn, maize, and tobacco. Opposite to Gar- 
bitzi the plain is about five miles broad, bounded 
by two parallel mountains of varied surface, woody, 
and studded with villages in the lower parts, and 
rising above to steep ridges of calcareous rock, the 
summits of which are now covered with snow, and 
the bare sides furrowed with white charadre, or 
beds of winter torrents: along the middle of the 
valley flows a river in a direction from south to 
north. Our road on emerging from the pass, 
changes from an eastern to a north-western direc- 
tion, along the foot of the mountain; and at the 
end of three miles we halt for the night, at the 
little village of Theriakhates'. The Papas, in 
whose house I lodge, is a cultivator of land, 


: Θεριαχάτες. 


24 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


holding it of the Musulman lord of the village, 
who supplies seed and cattle, and takes half the 
produce. He asserts that in summer, not only 
the plain is quite dry, but the river also, and that 
the air is not unhealthy. This perhaps is chiefly 
owing to the situation of the villages on the sides 
of the hills. They are for the most part sur- 
rounded with vineyards and a few olives. Oppo- 
site to Theriakhates is the town of Libékhovo}, 
situated, like Délvino, in an opening through 
which appears a parallel range still higher than 
that which borders the plain, and with a greater 
quantity of snow upon it. This high ridge 
is called Nemértzika’?. The pass of Libokhovo 
leads to Perméti, or Premedi, which stands on 
the eastern foot of Mount Nemértzika, in the vale 
of the Vidsa. In the hollow country between the 
two ranges behind Libékhovo, and extending from 
thence along the mountains towards Tepeléni, is 
the Albanian district of Lientja*, in Greek Λιουν- 
τζαριὰ, the country of the Λιούντζιδες. These people 
are noted for their skill in the irrigation of land, 
and the management. of aquzeducts, and in that 
capacity obtain employment at Constantinople, 
and in other distant parts of the Turkish empire. 
To the south of the Liuntzidhes is the district 
called Pogoniani, or Pogéyani, of which Dhel- 
vinaki is the chief place; and to the north-east- 


᾿ ΛΔιμπώχοβος. sound of u in turn. The word 

> Νεμέρτζικα. is derived perhaps from λόγγος, 

° The italic e is here em- forest, with an Albanian sound. 
ployed to represent the English 


ps EPIRUS. 25 


ward, that of Zagoria. The Zagoriani inhabit 
the banks of a stream, which joins the Vidsa be- 
tween Klistira and Tepeléni. 

Below Libékhovo, on the skirts of the plain, are 
seen some buildings where the snuff is made for 
which this valley is celebrated ; and in the mid 
plain, which is here about four miles across, the 
Papas points out to me a mound near the left bank 
of the river, which by the description seems to be 
asmall theatre’. It is now inaccessible, the plain 
being a marsh quite up to the rocks of Theriak- 
hates. The whole valley is called by the Greeks 
Deropoli, which the Albanians pronounce Derd- 
pugl’?: the river is named Dhryno, or Dryno, or 
Druno, or river of Derdpoli. Arghyrokastro, the 
chief town, contains about 2000 Musulman fami- 
lies; Libékhovo half that number ; in each are 
about 100 Christian houses. 

The road to Ioannina from the dervéni of Gra- 
bitza follows up the plain of Derdpoli to the south- 
ward. At a quarter of an hour it crosses a branch 
of the Dryno, half an hour further another branch; 
and a quarter of an hour beyond, the main stream 
of the river. The road soon afterwards ascends 
the eastern hills, from which many torrents descend 
into the river, after having turned some more snuff- 
mills. It then enters Pogéyani, leaves Dhelvinaki 


* Dr. Holland visited this present the Italian sound of 
position in the year 1813, and thatcombination. But it may 
ascertained that the ruin is_ be observed, that the Albanians 
really a small theatre, appar- generally give this guttural 
ently of Roman times. sound to the Greek lambda. 

* The gi is intended to re- 


26 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


on the left, crosses again to the left bank of the 
Dryno, which originates in the mountains around 
Dhelvinaki, passes through the valleys of Xerdévalto 
and Tzerovina, crosses the Kalama near its sources, 
and from thence proceeds into the plain of 
loannina. 

Dec. 27.—At half-past seven this morning we 
continue to skirt the foot of the mountain in a 
northerly direction, advancing very slowly through 
rocky ground, or along the edge of the marshy 
plain, and leaving several small villages on the 
heights above us, until ten, when we arrive at the 
point of a low projecting ridge, where the river, 
wide, deep, and rapid, approaches so near to the 
heights as to leave only a passage for the road. 
On the point stands the village of Kuloritza, and 
on a similar projection, two miles further, the 
town of Arghyrokastro. 

Not thinking it right to visit this place, as Aly 
Pasha and the Kastrites', or rather a powerful 
party in the town, are at present in a state of mu- 
tual obversation, we leave it on the left, and cross- 
ing a high narrow bridge of four arches below the 
town, halt a little beyond it for twenty minutes at 
a fountain. The plain here is not more than a 
mile and a half in breadth, and is all in pasture. 
Arghyrokastro occupies a large space of ground, 
being divided into separate clusters of houses, 
which are defended from one another by deep 
ravines. The mountain on which it stands is bare 
and deficient in water, and it is difficult to imagine 


* ot Kaorpirate. 


ι.} EPIRUS. 27 


a more disadvantageous situation, except with a 
view to the interminable disputes among the Alba- 
nian fares, for here the hostile families, separated 
from each other by rocks and ravines, may cherish 
their quarrels for years together without any effec- 
tual result. 

In the plain between Libékhovo and Arghyré- 
kastro, the Dryno is joined by the Sukha, which 
rises in Mount Nemértzika, and after watering the 
fertile valley of the Liantzidhes, to the eastward of 
Libokhovo, enters the plain through a narrow 
opening on the northern side of that town. Having 
reached a projection of the eastern hills, we coast 
them for two or three miles, strike again across a 
part of the plain, and at 1°15 arrive at a Khan 
called Valaré, or in the Albanian pronunciation, 
Valiaré, situated on the right bank of a torrent 
which descends obliquely from the mountain into 
the Dryno. The Khan’ is reckoned five hours 
from Tepeléni; the road thither lying along the 
foot of the mountain, and over some low heights 
which project from it. Finding it impossible, with 
such cattle as we have, to reach Tepeléni to-night, 
we follow the torrent at the foot of the eastern 
mountain, which here projects considerably into 
the valley, and forms a variety of lower heights. 

Instead of stopping at Gariani’, which is at the 
entrance of these hills, we are induced, in search 
of better accommodation, to proceed to Labovo, 
which is asserted to be only half an hour higher 


* See a note on Khan Va- * Ῥκαριανὴ, Καργιαγή. 
liaré at the end of this volume. 


28 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


on the mountain. We ascend accordingly by a 
winding path, which is not the better for being 
paved, as half the stones have been displaced by 
the torrents, but see nothing of Labovo for two 
hours, nor until we had entered the clouds, which 
have settled upon the hills with a southerly wind, 
and brought on rain. 

Λάμποβος, vulgarly pronounced Liabovo, accord- 
ing to the guttural sound of the / in Albanian, is 
situated not far below one of the highest summits 
of the range, but in a situation where a more gra- 
dual slope than that which we ascended admits of 
space for the scattered houses of the village, and 
for some vineyards and fields of kalambokki. It 
is entirely Christian, and there are eight or ten 
churches, besides those in the detached quarters, 
for, like the larger Albanian villages in general, 
Labovo consists of several detached makhalas. 
They suffered last year from a deficient harvest, 
and derive no advantage from being near Tepe- 
léni, as the Vezir Aly, when he visits his native 
place, calls upon Labovo among other neighbour- 
ing places to furnish him with provision for his 
household, particularly eggs, poultry, and wood. 
On the summit of the ridge above Labovo stands 
Tjaiibe, in a situation so exposed to storms, that 
it is necessary to pile stones and earth upon the 
roofs to prevent them from being blown away, 
although composed of heavy masses of stone. 
From a peak of this ridge, called Strakavétzi, the 
monastery of Aghio Naam, near Bitolia, is said to 
be visible. 

Dec. 28.—Very soon after quitting Labovo, (at 


1. | EPIRUS. 29 


half-past eight,) the town of Kardhiki, or Gard- 
hiki, appears over the northern extremity of the 
range of Arghyrokastro, on a height surrounded 
by a valley through which the Beélitza river takes 
its course to jom the Dryno. The junction of 
these two streams occurs a little below the Khan 
Valiaré, between it and a bridge over the united 
river. 

The slopes of the mountain of Labovo, as far as the 
river Vidsa, are well cultivated, and contain many 
villages. One of the largest. of these, named Khor- 
movo', resisted for a long time the growing power 
of Aly Pasha, when at length, about nine years ago, 
he took it, murdered the male inhabitants, and 
burned alive the Prift?, who commanded the 
village, in revenge for the ill-treatment which 
Aly’s mother and sister had suffered from this 
man and others, when they were made prisoners, 
by the allied forces of Khérmovo and Gardhiki, 
soon after the death of Aly’s father. 

In something less than two hours we arrive at 
the foot of the mountain, on the right bank of the 
Dryno, which, between the bridge of Arghyré- 
kastro, where we crossed it, and this place, has 
received, besides the Bélitza and torrent of Va- 
laré, a contribution much larger than either from 
a source at the foot of the mountain about midway 
between Arghyrokastro and the Bélitza, so that 
here the river is almost twice as large as at the 
bridge of Arghyrékastro. The great source iust 
mentioned is said to be the only portion of the 


* Χόρμοβος. ἡ Priest in Albanian. 


30 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


river permanent in very dry seasons. The stream 
now enters a narrow vale between two mountains ; 
that to the west is united with ridges which inclose 
on every side the valley of Gardhiki; the eastern, 
on which stands Khérmovo, is a westerly projection 
of the mountain of Labovo. We cross the river by 
the bridge of the Subashi, so named ; which has 
three arches resting upon piers, with arched open- 
ings in them. The middle arch, which is much 
the largest, is pointed at the top, and its height is 
equal to about two thirds of the span. The road- 
way is so narrow and roughly paved, and the struc- 
ture so high, that it is scarcely ever passed but on 
foot. From the bridge to Tepeléni, the distance 
is about six miles—two thirds along the Dryno, 
and the remainder on the bank of the Vidsa', after 
it has received the Dryno. The road has been 
paved, but as the mountain rises immediately 
above it, the torrent has carried away the pave- 
ment in many parts, and left a track just pass- 
able. | 

The fortress and serai of the Vezir, standing on 
a tabular projection, surrounded by cliffs towards 
the river, have an imposing appearance at a dis- 
tance, and are quite in harmony with the sublime 
scenery around. The village of Tepeléni, indeed, 
which consists of not more than eighty or ninety 
Musulman families, with a small detached suburb 
of Christians, is no great embellishment to the 
scene; but upon the whole, the palace is one of 
the most romantic and delightful country-houses 


' Buwooa, otherwise called Bootoa, or Βονῆσσα. 


1} EPIRUS. 91 


that can be imagined. The height is the termi- 
nation of one of the counterforts of a snowy range 
of mountains, bordering the vale of the Vidsa to 
the west, and is defended on the northern side 
by the ravine of a stream called Bantja', which, 
though sometimes dry in summer, now pours a 
large supply into the Vidsa. The village is sur- 
rounded by vineyards which produce a poor red 
wine ; beyond which, wheat and barley are the 
produce of the higher lands around; and kalam- 
bokki that of the low level on the banks of the 
river. 7 

Immediately above Tepeléni, the piers of a 
ruined bridge stretch across the Vidsa, the arches 
of which were carried away three years ago by 
an inundation, and are now supplied by a tem- 
porary wooden communication. From the oppo- 
site bank of the river rises a steep and lofty moun- 
tain, named Trebushin ; on the side of which are 
a Tekiéh, or convent of dervises, and a village 
named Petzisti. 

Mount Trebushin is separated only from the 
similar mountain of Khormovo by the Vidsa, which 
at two miles above Tepeléni emerges from a bog- 
hazi, or narrow gorge’, between the two moun- 
tains, and joining the Dryno, spreads over a space 
of near half a mile; where the river is divided by 
sand-banks into several streams now deep and 
broad, but some of which have no existence in 
summer. 

Mount Trebushin sends forth a branch to the 


1 Μπάντζα. ? Mroydé., from the Turkish bohaz, throat. 


32 EPIRUS. | CHAP. 


northward, which extends to the Illyrian plains, 
between Berat and Avl6na, bounding the vale of 
the Vidsa, below Tepeléni, on the eastern side, oppo- 
site to the parallel ridge before mentioned, of which 
the highest summit (not seen from Tepeléni), is 
named in Albanian Griva (grey), from its being 
constantly covered with snow, except for a short 
time in the middle of summer. The southerly and 
westerly winds, which have now prevailed for a 
fortnight, have melted the snow on the western 

side of all the mountains, but have left it in 
considerable quantity on the opposite face of 
them. 

The narrow ravine between Trebushin and the 
mountain of Khdérmevo, from which the Vidsa 
emerges, is called ra Στενὰ τῆς Βιώσας, or the 
Straits of the Vidsa. It extends four hours to the 
eastward, throughout which distance the river 
flows between two high mountains, every where 
steep, and in some places perpendicular. The 
Stena terminate at the village of Klistra’, above 
which the valley widens, and from thence conti- 
nues to be nearly of the same breadth for a consi- 
derable distance beyond Premedi. At Klistira 
Aly has built a fortress, in a lofty situation, above 
the right bank of the river, and is thus master of 
both ends of this important defile. 

There can be little doubt that this pass is the 
celebrated Fauces Antigonenses, or Aoi Stena, 
near Antigoneia, in which Philip, son of Deme- 


᾿ Κλεισοῦρα, from κλείω: a applied to a pass, or a place 
word of middle Greek, often _ situated in a pass. 


T. | EPIRUS. 33 


trius, attempted in vain to arrest the progress of 
the Roman consul, Titus Quinctius Flamininus, 
through Epirus. 

Dec. 31.—The road from Tepeléni to Nivitza 
leads along the river Bantza (in Albanian Benja), 
through a hollow in the range of Griva, from which 
that river descends. This pass conducts to Pre- 
gonati, situated at the head of the valley of the 
Sutzista, which descends to Nivitza, and joins the 
Vidsa in the plain of Apollonia. Thus Tepeléni, 
in all the four quarters, is approached by a narrow 
valley ; from the east and north by that of the 
Vidésa, from the south by the valley of the Dryno, 
and from the west by that of the Bantza. On the 
left bank of the Bantza, three or four miles above 
Tepeléni, is a ruined castle, bearing the same 
name as the river. It occupies the summit of a 
height, and incloses about two acres. Nothing is 
left but the foundations, except at the upper end, 
where are some remains of a round tower, of very 
thick and regular courses of masonry, cemented 
with a great quantity of mortar. The shape and 
position of the castle, and its citadel at the round 
tower, incline me to think that the fortress is an- 
cient, although no part of the masonry resembles the 
massy and beautiful constructions of the southern 
Greeks. On the opposite bank of the river, not a 
mile above the ruins, is the small village Bantza, 
which is said to have been built about thirty years 
ago by one of the fares, or family alliances of Pre- 
gonati, which, in consequence of the internal dis- 
putes of that town, and the superiority acquired 
by their opponents, had been obliged to leave it. 

VOL. I. D 


34 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


Several other small villages were founded at that 
time in the country around Pregonati from the 
same cause. It may be thought, perhaps, that 
Bantza is a corruption of Amantia, and that it 
proves that ancient city to have stood either at 
Bantza or at Tepeléni, but Amantia was certainly 
much nearer to Aulon, and Bantza may, perhaps, 
be the ancient name, with scarcely any change’. 
Below Tepeléni the Vidsa continues to flow for 
twelve hours between the two ranges of mountains 
already mentioned, as far as Gradista, sometimes 
closely confined between rocky banks, at others 
leaving small plains, or cultivated open heights, 
on either side, and thus the country is divided 
by nature into districts, each of which contains 
several villages, generally small. The first of 
the plains below Tepeléni is that of Lopesi, pro- 
nounced Lidépesi by the Albanians, of which the 
chief village is named Dukai, in Greek Dukadhes. 
Here is a ruim on the left bank of the river, simi- 
lar to that of Bantza. Opposite to Lopesi, a quar- 
ter of an hour from the right bank of the river, 
stands Vasari, or Vashari, according to the usual 
Albanian and vulgar Greek pronunciation of the 
sigma. On the opposite side, one hour from Du- 
kai, is Sarali, distant half an hour from the left 
bank of the river, from whence there is a road 
across Mount Griva to Nivitza, by a ravine called 
Grobate Pliakes, or the vale of the old woman, so 


* The Βαντίοι were a people imported probably from Greece. 
of Thrace; and Barrera was VV. Stephan. in Βάντεια. 
the name of an Italian town, 


EPIRUS. 30 


I. | 


called because a woman was once frozen to death 
in passing. Continuing from Sarali on the way 
to Avléna, occurs, at the end of an hour and a 
half, Dhumbliani, containing three hundred houses, 
and situated at the same distance from the Vidsa 
as Sarali; three hours beyond it is Kudhesi, of 
five hundred houses, the chief town of a district 
containing several villages, and situated on the 
mountain, which commands the fork of the rivers 
Vidsa and Sutzista. 

On the river side, below Lopesi, is the district 
of Kalitzi, separated from that of Lopesi by a 
rocky shore, on which stands another ruined for- 
tress, near the village of Lunji, which is about 
half way between Tepeléni and Gradista. Another 
rocky shore terminates Kalutzi on the left bank, 
beyond which the country begins to open towards 
the plain ; then occurs Karvunari, a town of Kad- 
hesi, then Gradista, on the right bank, and Sele- 
nitza on the left, where are the mines of fossil 
pitch described by Strabo ; and then the junction of 
the Vidsa with the Satzista, or river of Nivitza. 

From all I can learn, the most considerable 
Hellenic cities in this part of the country were at 
Gradista and Nivitza. If the latter was Amantia, as 
I can hardly doubt from the strong testimony of the 
ancient authors, the former was probably Byllis’, 


1 Dr. Holland, who visited 
Gradista in 1813, has deter- 
mined this question by the 
Latin inscription which he 
copied there, and which, al- 
though very imperfect, attests 


D 


that M. Valerius Maximus had 
made a road through rugged 
passes from the Roman colony 
of Bullis to some other place. 
This Colonia Bullidensis 15 
mentioned by Pliny (1. 4, c. 10), 
2 


36 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


or Bullis, for Byllis, Amantia and Apollonia were 
the three principal cities in the vicinity of the 
Gulf of Aulon. 

This evening the Dervises mount to the top of 
Mount Trebushin; and on their return declare 
the new moon visible, though the sky is so clouded 
that the sun could not have been seen, had it been 
above the horizon. Several guns are then fired at 
intervals of five minutes, and the rioting of the 
Bairam begins. 

Knowing how little the Musulman Albanians 
care for the ceremonies or the doctrines of their 
religion, I was surprised to find them, on my arri- 
val, keeping the Ramazan so corneotlg: Not a 
pipe was to be seen till the muezzin had called the 


but we have no knowledge of 
the time of its establishment. 
The inscription is not earlier 
than the reign of Trajan, as 
appears by the frequent oc- 
of the word UI- 


currence 
pia. Although it can hardly 
be doubted that the Ro- 


man colony occupied the same 
position as the Greek city, it 
is remarkable that both Ste- 
and Ptolemy place 
the 
and 


phanus 
Byllis on the sea coast ; 
latter between Aulon 

Amantia. Livy also, by stat- 
ing (1. 36, c. 7,) that Hanni- 
bal proposed to Antiochus to 
collect his forces in the Bylli- 
nus ager preparatory to his 
passing over into Italy, shows 


that a part at least of the dis- 
trict was adjacent to the sea. 
Possibly both Ptolemy and 
Stephanus referred to a λιμὴν, 
or maritime establishment of 
the Bylliones, which at one 
period may have been as im- 
portant as the city itself. If 
the Amantini had in like man- 
ner a maritime dependency, 
the arrangement of Ptolemy is 
perfectly explained: his order 
being ‘the mouth of the 
Aous, Aulon, Bullis, Amantia, 
the mouth of the Celydnus, 
Oricum, the Acroceraunia.” 
Celydnus, as I before remark- 
ed, is the only name that ap- 
pears to be out of its place. 


I. | EPIRUS. 37 


evening prayer from the minaret of the Pasha’s 
mosque. But the Vezir, though he generally 
drinks wine openly at table, seems to think it 
right to set a good Musulman example to the wild 
Téskidhes and Liapidhes of his native mountains, 
whose ancestors probably adopted the fast the 
more readily from its resembling one of the ob- 
servances of the church from which they apos- 
tatized, without being so severe a penance as the 
Christian Lent. In fact, the Ramazan is no mor- 
tification at all in winter, when the short days 
leave the Musulmans at liberty to feast as early as 
five in the evening. 

Aly’s sons, Mukhtar and Vely, were born by 
a daughter of Kaplan Pasha, of Délvino. His 
third son, Salih, who is only three or four years 
old, was by a slave. It does not appear that the 
sons have been educated in such a manner as can 
adapt them for preserving the power which the 
father has founded, or that he himself looks much 
farther in this respect than other Turks. Indeed, 
a Turk, or Musulman Albanian, not short-sighted, 
avaricious, or intent upon momentary advantages, 
would be a rarissima avis. Aly is his own Kehaya 
and Hasnadar, trusts not even his own sons, and 
transacts every thing himself, except where writing 
is required, when he dictates to a Turkish or 
Greek secretary. His own writing is execrably 
bad, and his Greek orthography worse ; the little 
that he learnt when a boy having been almost lost 
by that want of practice caused by the custom 
common in every part of the east among the great, 
of always employing a secretary. Turkish he can 


38 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


read, but never attempts to write, though it formed 
a part of his education: in fact it is not much 
wanted, except for some formal letters to the Porte, 
or to some of the Pashas of Rumili; his commu- 
nications with the government being chiefly carried 
on in Greek by means of his Kapi-Tjokhadar, or 
acknowledged agent, residing at Constantinople. 
With the Albanians his written correspondence is 
in Greek, except perhaps in a few rare cases where 
he wishes his missive to be publicly read in Alba- 
nian, in which case it is written in that language 
with Greek characters. 

The person of most importance under the Vezir 
is Suliman, the Seliktar Aga, now absent. It is 
said that his influence in southern Albania is such, 
that in the event of the Pasha’s death, he might 
place himself at the head of a party at least equal 
to those of Mukhtar or Vely, for little doubt seems 
to be entertained that the two brothers will be op- 
posed to each other. Already the symptoms of 
this future civil war are apparent. Mukhtar, know- 
ing that by money he can always command the 
affections of the Albanians, is a thesaurizer, while 
his brother, who is a mere sensualist, but with 
much more talent than Mukhtar, is much less 
provident. 

Another person in whom the Vezir places great 
confidence, is Yusaf Aga Arapi, nominally His 
Highness’s Hasnadar, in whose house, now oc- 
cupied by his son, Bekir Aga, 1 am lodged. He 
has always been employed by the Vezir in the 
management of the Dervénia, and hence is 
thoroughly acquainted with the country, from the 

12 


I. | EPIRUS. 39 


frontiers of Dalmatia to the isthmus of Corinth. 
He is described as a man of talent and activity, 
extremely attached to his master, brave, ferocious, 
active, and cruel. Two other officers, whom the 
Vezir generally keeps near him, are Tatza Bulu- 
bashi, a Musulman, and Athanasi Vaia, a Chris- 
tian, the ready instruments of many an atrocious 
act of cruelty. All these persons, including the 
Pasha’s sons, are usually dressed in the Albanian 
fashion, with a coat or jacket covered with gold 
lace, and a shirt falling down in folds over the 
drawers, resembling the drapery of the Roman 
statues. When new and clean it is a beautiful 
costume ; but a clean shirt is not a weekly luxury 
even with all the higher classes'; and among the 
soldiers it is sometimes worn out without ever 
being washed, though occasionally taken off, and 
held over the fire, that the animals contained in 
it, intoxicated by the smoke, may fall into the 
fire, when a crackling announces the success of 
the operation. Sometimes during the first two 
or three weeks of a new shirt or waistcoat, or 
when particularly desirous of making a favourable 
appearance, they wear a collar of cotton, impreg- 
nated with oxyde of mercury, which forms a 
barrier to the more aspiring natives, and keeps 
them out of sight. The same want of cleanliness 
pervades every class in proportion, in all their 
domestic arrangements. Aly himself has been 
so accustomed to the rudest Albanian life in his 


* Volney remarked, inapart manners, that even Pashas did 
of Turkey, more refined in its not count their shirts by dozens. 


40 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


youth, that the dirtiness of his people gives him 
little disgust, and as policy obliges him to receive 
the lowest Albanian with familiarity and apparent 
confidence, to allow them to approach him, to kiss 
the hem of his garment, to touch his hand, and 
to stand near him while they converse with him, 
his dress is often covered with vermin, and there 
is no small danger of acquiring these companions 
by sitting on his sofa, where they are often seen 
crawling amidst embroidered velvet and cloth of 
gold. : 

A Divan Efféndi and a Turkish Secretary, both 
πολίταις, or natives of Constantinople, form a part 
also of Aly’s court. They preserve the Turkish 
costume, and look upon the Albanians with that 
mixture of fear and contempt, which is the gene- 
ral feeling of the Turks towards this nation. 
Through the medium of the Constantinopolitans 
residing with him, and that of his own resident 
at the Porte, Aly manages the good understand- 
_ing, which he has the policy to keep up with the 
supreme government. He makes frequent presents 
to the Validé Sultana, and her powerful Kehaya 
Yusif. He has augmented his dominions as much 
by the intermarriages of his family with the chief- 
tains around him, as by his military or political 
skill. Arghyrokastro and Libokhovo have been 
brought under his influence chiefly by the mar- 
riage of his sister, Khainitza, with Suliman, of 
Arghyroékastro, sometime Pasha of Trikkala, whose 
son, Adém Bey, now resides with his mother, as 
Governor of Libékhovo, under the orders of the 
Vezir, having succeeded in this post to his bro- 


I. | EPIRUS. 41 


ther, Elmas Bey, who died not long since at 
Joannina. 

Aly has no other relatives except his grand- 
children. His sister, before she married Suliman 
of Arghyrékastro, was the wife of Suliman’s bro- 
ther, Aly, by whom she had a daughter married 
to Vely, Bey of Klistra. It is said that Aly, of 
Arghyrékastro, was murdered by his brother, in 
concert with Aly of Tepeléni, and his sister: it 
is certain, at least, that Suliman, very soon after 
his brother’s death, married the widow. Eight 
years ago Aly obtained possession of Klisura, by 
murdering his nephew-in-law, the Bey, together 
with his younger brother, whom he had enticed 
to Ioannina, to assist at the nuptials of his son 
Vely with the daughter of Ibrahim Pasha, by 
which alliance the peace between the two Vezirs 
was ratified. Aly pretended to have discovered 
that not only the Bey, but his brother, who had 
accompanied him, had been engaged in a plot 
against the Vezir. By this act Aly cleared away 
all the claimants to Klisura: a most important 
point, which secures Tepeléni and Premedi, and 
opens the road to Berat. 

At Arghyroékastro, as in other independent towns 
of Albania, the power was formerly divided among 
several leagues, whose chieftains were continually 
at war. At present, Morteza Bey, brother of Su- 
liman Pasha, chiefly by his alliance with Aly, is 
at the head of the strongest party '. 

Mutja Hushtf (Albanian for Musa Yusiaf, or 


" See a note on Arghyrokastro at the end of this volume. 


42 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


Moses Joseph) was the name of Aly’s great grand- 
father, from whom the family are called in Greek 
ot Μουτζαχουσσάτες. My host, Bekir Aga, asserts, 
that Hushaf conquered all Albania with his sa- 
bre’, which, though a mere amplification, shows 
that his power was considerable. His son, Mukh- 
tar, accompanied the expedition of Kara Mustafa, 
the Seraskier of Sultan Hamid III., in union with 
the fleet of the Kapitan Pasha Djanum Khodja 
against Corfu, in the year 1716, when the island 
was defended by Marshal Schulemberg, whose 
statue still remains in the Citadel, erected by the 
Venetian republic, in gratitude for this defence of 
the island. Mukhtar was killed in the slege, 
having fallen in the assault of the fortress; and it 
is believed in Albania that his sword is still kept 
at Corfu, among the trophies of that expedition. 
Vely, the father of Aly, was the youngest of three 
brothers, or half-brothers, but having succeeded 
in destroying the two elder, became the head of 
the house. He died at an early age, leaving Aly 
a child in the care of his mother Khanko, daughter 
of a Bey of Konitza, who was of the same family 
as Kurt Pasha of Berat, at that time the most 
powerful chieftain in Albania. Aly has now been 
a Vezir for about four years, and is not a little 
proud of the third tail, which the Porte has gene- 
rally been very unwilling to confer upon Albanians. 
Having bestowed it upon Aly, they gave it also 
to the two Ibrahims, in order to keep the balance 
of power even. 


1 Μὲ ro onadirov. 


1.| EPIRUS. 43 


Aly disgusts all the Franks who come to seek 
their fortune in his service, by his parsimony. 
He scarcely ever gives them any fixed pay, what- 
ever he may have promised, but confines himself 
to making them presents in clothes and money, 
when they perform any particular service. If they 
are not married, he is always anxious to provide 
them with wives, that he may have hostages to 
prevent their leaving the place. Those who have 
to provide for the different departments of his 
household, are said to be the only persons who 
enrich themselves in his service. 

The Franks at present in the Vezir’s service are 
a Milanese, who had previously been employed 
by the Pashas of Berat and Skodra, and who has 
undertaken to’ complete a foundry at Ioannina: 
there are also a French engineer, a carpenter, 
who makes gun carriages, a Dalmatian watch- 
maker, and an Italian smith. These people, 
though really able men in their professions, will 
soon be forced to leave his service from the want 
of encouragement. 

Plutarch informs us, that Pyrrhus was an as- 
siduous courtier, and studious when young of 
acquirmg the friendship of powerful persons. 
This is generally the Albanian character. They 
are anxious to secure the favour of their superiors, 
and faithful to them while regularly paid. Their 
revolts which so often occur, are generally caused 
by the ill-faith of the employers, who often begin 
an enterprize without sufficient pecuniary means, 
trusting to success for an augmentation of them. 


44 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


The Albanians, being generally poorer than the — 
Turks, are more moderate in their expectations, 
more patient and persevering, more familiar 
with hardships from their infancy, but equally 
greedy of money, and much more saving. The 
Albanian soldier will either plunder or live on the 
hardest fare, as circumstances may require, to 
save his pay; his prime object being to return 
home with a well-filled girdle; for the zone, 
as among the Romans, is the treasury of the 
Albanian. Their military qualities are rather 
shown in the ὁδὸν ἐλθέμεναι, than in the ἄνδρασιν 
ἶφι μάχεσθαι, and their wars consist entirely in 
stratagem, rapine, and ambuscade, though few 
of them are deficient in personal courage, when 
the occasion calls for it. One of the advantages 
of the Albanians is their independence of other 
countries for the greater part of the manufactures 
of that rude kind with which they are content. 
Their arms are all made in Albania, with the 
exception of the gun-barrels, the greater part of 
which are from the north of Italy, though an 
inferior kind both of musquet and pistol-barrels 
are made at Skédra, Prisrénd, Kalkandere, Pris- 
tma, and Grevena: gun locks are made both in 
Greece and Albania; some 1 have seen from 
Karpenisi, in 4tolia, which have a polish (f that 
be any merit) equal to those of England. The 
kind of musquet, however, which the Albanians 
use is very inconvenient, and is adapted only to 
their own irregular discipline, being long and 
heavy, without any balance of weight in the 


L. | EPIRUS. 45 


stock, which is particularly thin and light, and 
the piece is thus incapable of an aim without 
resting. 

The coarse woollen cloth used for the outer gar- 
ments of the Albanians is chiefly made at Skodra. 
It is a thick white coarse cloth, which wears well, 
and when adorned with a broad lace, forms one of 
the handsomest national costumes in Europe. It is 
much superior in quality to that of the black kapa, 
or outer cloak, made in all the mountains of 
Northern Greece, and which is very generally 
worn by the shepherds, peasants, and lower orders 
both of Greece and Albania, as well as by the ma- 
riners of the Greek and Adriatic seas. 

The Pasha asserts, that in the country, of which 
Tepeléni gives him the command, there are not 
less than 16000 men armed with musquets, who 
are considered among the best soldiers in Albania. 
However correct this numeration may be, it is cer- 
tain, at least, that Albania is better peopled than any 
equal portion of European Turkey, that notwith- 
standing the great number of the soldiery employed 
abroad, it maintains its population, and that every 
male, from his infancy, is familiar with the use of 
arms. The Vezir describes Albania as 200 hours 
in length ; in one half of which his own influence 
predominates, while the remainder is about equally 
divided between Ibrahim Pasha of Berat, and Ibra- 
him Pasha of Skodra. He admits, however, that 
there are still some chieftains who do not acknow- 
ledge the authority of the three. Nor is it likely 
that the country will ever quietly submit to a single 
hand, although this is evidently the object of all 


46 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


the Vezir’s actions. The quarrels of the chieftains 
are the delight of the inferior classes, and a con- 
stant source of profit to them. As the former are 
of every degree of power, the minor agree with the 
more powerful for the hire of their service, and 
that of their followers. When the hostile parties 
are persons of great authority, one of their first 
considerations is the employment of skilful agents 
to treat for the services of the inferior chieftains, 
or to make any other bargains useful to the 
cause. | 

It often happens in the course of a campaign, 
between two contending powers, that a village, a 
single house, a tabia, a meteris', or an occupied 
position, is bought from the possessors by the op- 
posite party, and though the villages on the hostile 
frontier generally suffer, yet, as Albanian houses 
are quickly constructed, such injuries are often 
unworthy of consideration compared with the ad- 
vantage which the inhabitants derive from their 
purchase by the contending parties. Sometimes 
the head of a family, who is known to be able to 
command a certain number of tuféks, privately 
meets the emissary of the chief who wishes to en- 
gage his services; he endeavours to raise the lufé, 
or daily pay, of each man as high as possible ; 
next requires so many lufés for those whom he is 
to engage to take care of his house in his absence ; 


* These are Turkish words. furnishes the rest necessary for 
The meteris is a trench which, firing the tufék or musquet. 
with the earth thrown outwards, The tabia is a redoubt of the 
is just sufficient to serve as a same kind of construction as 
breastwork;andthetopofwhich the meteris. 


I. | EPIRUS. 47 


then a farther acknowledgment, perhaps, to en- 
able him to raise a meteris In some important spot 
for the defence of the house, or any other pretext 
of the same kind. When the bargain is finally 
made, he ties round his waist all the money paid 
in advance, makes the best provision he can for 
the care of his family, and comes into the field 
with half, or at most two thirds, of the men whom 
he is paid for, and remains, perhaps, only until he 
can make a new bargain with the opponents. Such 
treachery, however, although not uncommon among 
the poorest tribes of Albania, is not held in estima- 
tion, unless upon a very large scale, and for some 
great object. It may easily be conceived, that 
with such customs the Albanians have a particular 
objection to a muster. I have seen a Grand Vezir 
attempt it, when, instead of effecting his object, he 
had the upper part of his tent perforated in a hun- 
dred places with musquet-shot. The operations 
of Albanian warfare in the field being chiefly con- 
fined to dodging behind trees and firing at long 
distances from cover, and few but the chiefs 
being in earnest, their campaigns are tardy and 
expensive, and their wars seldom of any great 
duration, or productive of decisive results. Ulti- 
mate success, of course, is sure to attend the trea- 
sury which is the best provided. 

The Albanians are fond of the chase, and almost 
every man of landed property keeps greyhounds 
for coursing the hare, which is their favourite 
sport. The Vezir has an establishment here, and 
a few days ago brought home six hares and a fox. 
He sent me his horses and dogs one day, with an 


48 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


order to Bekir Aga to accompany me, but the 
weather prevented us from going. There is no 
want of red-legged partridges on the hills, but 
netting is the only mode by which they are taken. 

The greater number of Aly’s subjects being 
Christians, he is very watchful over the bishops, 
often employs them as instruments of extortion, 
and is careful that every act of theirs shall tend to 
the stability and extension of his own power. He 
often requires their attendance at loannina, or 
wherever he may happen to be, and shows them 
favour, so far as to support their authority over 
the Christians, and sometimes to assist them with 
a little military force if it should be necessary for 
the collection of their dues, which consist chiefly 
in a fixed contribution from every Christian house. 
They are not exempt, however, from those occa- 
sional calls upon their purses, from which no man 
within his reach is free whom he considers capable 
of paying. The most important of his ecclesiastical 
ministers is the metropolitan bishop of Ioannina, a 
Naxiote by birth, whose diocese comprehends the 
greater part of Epirus. I overtook him at the 
bridge of the Subashi, on his way to court. 

His ἐπαρχία, or province, contains four subordi- 
nate sees; namely, 1. Vela, Βελᾶς ; 2. Dhryndpoli, 
Δρυϊνοπόλεως ; 8. Délvino and Khimara, Δελβίνου 
kat Χειμάρας ; 4. Vuthroto and Glyky, Βουθρωτοῦ καὶ 
Γλυκέως. Of these, Délvino and Khimara only 
remain, the two others being traceable only by 
their ruins; of the first the residence is Kénitza ; 
of the second, Arghyrokastro; of the fourth, Pa- 
ramythia. The northern limit of the bishopric of 


1. | EPIRUS. 49 


Drynopolis, or- Arghyrokastro, is the bridge of 
Tepeléni. To the eastward it comprehends Zago- 
ria, and borders upon the province of Κορυτζὰ, 
a town situated a day’s journey from Premedi, to 
the north-eastward. 

In the episcopal province of Ioannina the number 
of Musulmans bears a small proportion to that of 
the Christians, but in that of Korytza there are 
many villages entirely Mahometan ; in some, Ma- 
hometans are married to Greek women, the sons 
are educated as Turks, and the daughters as 
Christians ; and pork and mutton are eaten at the 
same table. The province of Beligrad, or Berat, 
borders on that of Korytza to the westward ; its 
metropolitan is styled bishop of Velagrada, the 
form which the Greeks have given to the Sclavonic 
word Beligrad. In the provinces of Korytza and 
Velagrada, as well as further north, the Musulman 
faith is supposed by the bishop of Loannina to be 
rapidly increasing. Instances have occurred of 
the apostasy of whole villages at a time. This 
happened in particular among the Karamuratates, 
who inhabit Mount Nemértzika, and the neigh- 
bouring valley of the Vidsa. 

Such examples, with the advantages, which a 
nation of mercenary soldiers cannot but find in be- 
longing to the dominant religion, instead of one 
which renders them objects of contempt and ill- 
treatment to those in power, are powerful motives 
to a rapid increase of apostasy. Meantime, the 
Christians who are employed in a larger propor- 
tion than the Musulmans, in pursuits of agricul- 
ture or trade, have a tendency to retreat from 

VOL. I. E 


50 EPIRUS. [cHaAr. 


the oppression of their countrymen of the adverse 
faith, or to occupy lands in Greece or elsewhere, 
where labour is wanted; and thus there is every 
prospect of Albania, once a Christian country, be- 
coming, at no distant period of time, almost en- 
tirely Mahometan. Apostasy has had similar 
effects among the Sclavonic nations of European 
Turkey, extending from Greece to the Danube, 
but by no means in the same proportion, unless 
it be m Bosnia. 

The bishop relates to me that the Khormevites 
were notorious robbers before they were reduced 
by the Vezir. Their favourite place of action was 
the Pass of Tepeléni, where one of their priests used 
to enter a hollow tree which stands between Tepe- 
léni and the bridge, while others lay in wait by 
the side of the road, and stopped the passengers 
until this Dodonzan Oracle was consulted. If the 
passenger was a Mahometan, the oracular voice 
generally ordered him to be stripped and hung 
upon the tree; if he was a Christian, belonging 
to a hostile village, he was perhaps dragged 
through the river. In other cases the Oracle was 
generally satisfied with sending the unlucky wight 
forward on foot, after his horse or ass had been 
taken from him. 

Jan. 2, 1805.—In consequence of a violent rain 
last night, the Bantza and Vidsa have swelled toa 
great height, so that the former occupies the whole 
of its bed, which at the mouth is three or four 
hundred yards across, and the Vidsa, which is 
nearly half a mile broad below the junction, pours 
even above it such a flood of water against the 

12 


7] EPIRUS. 5] 


bridge of Tepeléni, that it has almost over-topped 
the old piers, and threatens with ruin some masses 
of masonry which the Pasha has erected on the 
piers to support the wooden planks, now serving 
instead of the four arches which were carried 
away. Passengers still continue to cross from 
either bank, but the Vezir, fearful not so much 
for their safety perhaps as for that of the bridge, 
sits all the afternoon in a kiosk at one corner of his 
harém, looking towards it with anxiety. A Dervish 
observing him, goes out and dances upon the 
bridge, harangues the trees brought down by the 
stream as they pass through it, and at last makes 
a kurban, or sacrifice, of a black lamb and two 
white ones, pouring the blood upon one of the 
piers. After this ceremony the populace seems 
satisfied that the safety of the bridge is insured, 
and in fact no accident occurs. 

Both the ruined work and the temporary repair 
were erected by a Greek engineer who is building, 
with better success, a massy tower at the Serai. 
The piers have openings, with pointed arches and 
large spurs opposed to the current, but the whole 
work is obviously deficient in solidity, and the 
Aous will probably continue to be indignant of a 
bridge, until it has a master more liberal of ex- 
pence, and who will employ an architect better 
acquainted with modern improvements in this 
branch of his art. The Albanians endeavour to 
supply the place of solidity by making the arches 
of their bridges of an excessive height, which 
method they allege is subject only to the inconve- 
nience of obliging the traveller to dismount, while 

Β 2 


52 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


it admits of a great economy of materials, the 
breadth of a bridge being of little moment in a 
country where there are no wheel carriages. The 
Vezir expresses great disappointment at the failure 
of his attempts to establish a bridge at Tepeléni, as 
it causes a detour by that of the Dryno, and by 
another in the Stena, in order to reach the oppo- 
site bank when the river is not fordable; and, 
moreover, obliges his Highness on these occasions 
to enter the Pass of Klistira, where, if the stout Tés- 
kidhes of the neighbouring villages should prove 
rebellious, he might find himself in danger. 

Adjoining to a mosque which he built near his 
palace some years since, is a garden, which was 
then laid out for him by a Frenchman. On the 
wall which bounds it towards the river three guns 
are mounted, and two small kiosks are built. The 
garden is now in a neglected state, serving only 
to include the poultry which the Pasha obliges 
the villages around to supply. There are now 
between five and six hundred fowls in the garden, 
forty or fifty of which die every day in consequence 
of exposure to the rain, and want of food; not 
because there is any deficiency of barley or kalam- 
bokki, but because the purveyor sells it, laying 
the fault upon the weather and want of shelter, 
and knowing that as fast as the fowls die, the de- 
ficiency will be supplied by the villages. 

It is said, that Tepeléni once formed an alliance 
with two other villages; namely, Damesi, two 
hours to the north-east, on the direct road to Berat, 
over Mount Trebushin; and Dragoti, which stands 


$<] EPIRUS. 53 


a little within the Pass of the Vidsa above its right 
bank, and that at the head of the league was a 
woman named Helen. May not Tepeléni be τάφος 
Ἑλένης = The Turks call it Tepedellen ; the Alba- 
nians, Tebelen. There is a superstitious belief, 
that the houses in the village can never exceed 
one hundred. The Greek suburb, at the western 
extremity of the promontory on the edge of the 
hill over the Bantza, had lately so increased as to 
approach the Turkish quarter, and to give hopes 
that the spell would be broken; but last year a 
plague, which swept off whole families, put a stop 
to the increase of houses, and has left its marks in 
numerous recent graves, some of which have been 
opened by the late heavy rains. 

Jan. 4.—Many Albanian chiefs have arrived 
here within these few days to pay their homage to 
Aly; among others Abdulla Pasha of Elbassan. 
They all come attended with followers armed to 
the teeth, in numbers proportioned to the power 
and rank of the chiefs. Their array in approach- 
ing, and their introduction to the Vezir, afford 
some fine pictures of feudal life, which carry one 
back in imagination to Europe in the tenth cen- 
tury ; for the Turkish conquest of Albania has not 
merely prevented this country from partaking in 
the improvement of the rest of Europe, but has 
carried it in manners some centuries further back 
than it was at the time of the conquest, and, with 
the extension of the Mahometan religion, will 
render it every day more savage, and less capable 
of improvement. 


54 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


Among other persons who have arrived, is 
Mehmeét Effendi, Aly’s secretary for foreign affairs. 
This Mehmét is a Roman, whose name was Marco 
Quirini. He was a member of the inquisition at 
Rome, lived six years at Aleppo as a missionary of 
the Society de Propaganda Fide, and would have 
succeeded, so he says, to the bishopric of Bombay, 
had he not, in a fit of ennui, left Aleppo a year 
before the term of his residence expired. Happen- 
ing to be at Malta at the time of the arrival of the 
French expedition to Egypt, he was appointed by 
Buonaparte, in consequence of the knowledge of 
Arabic which he had acquired at Aleppo, his 
secretary-interpreter, but becoming tired of his 
situation at the end of three months, he sailed for 
Europe, was taken by a Dulciniote cruizer near 
Cape Stylo, and brought prisoner to loannina. 
Here, in despair of acquiring his liberty, and havy- 
ing persuaded himself that the Turkish religion 
would suit him, or at least recommend him to the 
Pasha, whose service he was tempted to enter, he 
renounced the errors of his youth, became a true 
believer, and now argues, with much Italian elo- 
quence, that the Islam is the only reasonable faith 
existing. At Aleppo he acquired a little English, 
together with his Arabic. He is a man of acute- 
ness, sense, and learning, and assuredly will most 
bitterly deplore the impatience of temper which 
has caused him to exchange such inconsiderable 
privations as he met with at Aleppo, or in Egypt, 
for the hard service of an Albanian master, among 
comrades with whom he can scarcely exchange 


1. | EPIRUS. 55 


an idea. The Pasha has, according to his usual 
policy, already persuaded him to take a wife, and 
now that he has him in his power, scarcely gives 
him the means of existence’. 


. After several years of this ized Europe, and died at Paris 
wretched life, Quirini was 80 a Christian. 
fortunate as to return to civil- 


CHAPTER ἢ, 


EPIRUS. 


Return from Tepeléni—Lizati— Stepézi—Dhrynopoli— River 
Bélitza—Kardhiki—The Gulimidhes—Zulati—Pass of Skar- 
fitza—Sénitza—Paleavli—Délvino—Finiki, Phcenice—Cap- 
ture of Phenice by the Ilyrians—Helicranum—A ntig oneca— 
Phanote—-Eleus—Hadrianopolis—Dryinopolis—The Argy- 
rini—Sail from the Forty Saints to Port Palérimo—Lukovo— 
Pikérnes— Sopoto—Kiepero—Khimara, Chimera—Khima- 
riote towns; their troops, manners, &c.—Return by sea to 
the Forty Saints—Hexamili—Tetranisa—Cassiope—Posidium 
—The Livari or fishery—Buthrotum ; port Pelodes—Lake, 
river, bay, and district of Vutzindro—Lake Riza—Geography 
of the coast of Epirus opposite to Corfa. 


Jan. 6.—This afternoon I return from Tepeléni, by - 
the same road as far as the bridge of the Subashi. 
The village of Dragoti being only hid from Tepe- 
léni by a projection of Mount Trebushin, soon 
becomes visible, and opposite to it Kotra, on a 
height above the junction of the Viosa and Dryno; 
then farther southward, on the western face of the 
same mountain, Lekhli; and then Khormovo. 
Opposite to Lekhli we pass under the village of 
Lizati, of two hundred houses, and meet Aidin 
Aga of Kaliasa with a long suite of palikaria’ on 
foot, on their way to court. A little short of the 
bridge of the Subashi is the hollow plane-tree 
where the robbers of Khormovo formerly lay in 


᾿ παλικάρια, from Π, πάλλαξ, guvenis. 


CHAP. I. | EPIRUS. 57 


wait for travellers. Here, on both sides of the 
river, the space is very narrow at the foot of the 
mountain, and on both sides there is a road; that 
which proceeds from the bridge along the foot of 
the mountain of Khormovo and Lekhli enters the 
Stena, and follows the left bank of the Vidsa as far 
as the vale of Kieperi, which is watered by a tribu- 
tary of the river. The bridge over the Dryno was 
formerly below Khéormovo, but having been swept 
away by the river, it was replaced higher up by 
that of the Subashi, which has now resisted the 
floods for several years. 

Leaving the bridge to our left, we proceed in the 
direction of Arghyrékastro. On the face of its moun- 
tain, nearly opposite to Kariani, is seen Maskoluri, a 
large village, and above it the monastery of Trypi, 
just below the summit, which terminates the moun- 
tain at the opening of the valley of Kardhiki. A 
small village called Tzepo stands more to the 
northward in the middle region of this mountain, 
and below it is Khumelitza opposite to Stepézi, 
which latter stands on the northern side of the 
opening leading from the valley of Derépugl into 
that of Kardhiki. The Bélitza', which waters the 
vale of Kardhiki, flows in a ravine through the 
opening, and joins the Dryno in the plain as 
already stated. At Stepézi we halt for the night. 
At first the people were not willing to receive us; 
and when the Bulu-bashi who accompanies me 
threatened them, ‘‘ We are poor,” they replied, 
‘‘and have nothing; we can but lose our lives;” 
but soon change their tone on learning, that con- 


1 Μπέλιτζα. 


58 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


trary to the remonstrances of the Bulu-bashi, I had 
given directions to pay for every thing, and declare 
that if the King of England wants soldiers, the 
whole village, to the number of three hundred, is 
ready to enter into his service. ‘‘ It would be 
easier,” observes one of them, ‘‘to maintain fifty 
Albanian soldiers than one English.” My konak 
is a hut which, like most of the houses in the 
Albanian villages, has no chimney, the fire being 
in the middle, and the smoke, after circulating for 
a while about the hut, finding its way out through 
the crevices of a roof covered with rude unformed 
tablets. of calcareous stone, called πλάκες, anglicé 
flakes. These being large and thick, are for the 
most part held in place by their own weight alone, 
but sometimes great stones are laid upon them. 
The rafters within are generally hung with the 
store of maize, here called mesiri, in the state in 
which it is brought from the field. Above Stepézi, 
near the top of the mountain, is seen the small 
village of Petzari; besides which, there are two or 
three others on the mountain not visible, so 
wretched as to be described in terms of compas- 
sion even by the Stepeziotes. 

Below in the plain, about half-way between 
Stepézi and the Khan Valiaré, I perceive the ruins 
called Dhrynépoli, written in Greek Δρυϊνούπολις, 
which appears to have been a fortress, or small 
fortified town of the time of the lower empire. It 
stands nearly opposite to the junction of the Bé- 
litza with the Dryno, and close by a rumed bridge 
over the torrent, which descends from the moun- 
tain of Laboyo. 


II. | EPIRUS. 59 


Jan. 7.—I had intended to proceed from Ste- 
pézi by land to Palérimo, halting this evening at 
Kaliasa, but the weather obliges us to alter our 
route. Soon after setting out, at 8.40, a distant 
movement in the plain towards Libékhovo an- 
nounces the approach of Vely Pasha, who is 
coming to visit his father at Tepeléni. We cross 
over the heights forming the lower part of the 
mountain of Stepézi: the land is little cultivated, 
but we pass some large flocks of sheep and goats, 
the shepherds bear staves headed with hooks of 
copper. Woods of oak diversify the scene, but 
there are no trees of any great size. At the end 
of three hours we arrive on the Bélitza, in the 
valley of Kardhiki, which is inclosed on every side 
by steep and lofty mountains. 

Kardhiki, or Gardhiki’, is situated on the side 
and summit of a steep hill, on the right bank of 
the Bélitza, at the junction of a torrent flowing 
from the south-west through a ravine which forms 
a precipice on that side of the town. The situa- 
tion of the place is one of the wildest that can be 
conceived, and its appearance is rendered more so 
by the season of the year. We are no sooner 
arrived, than a heavy fall of snow puts an end to 
our day’s journey, and makes me well satisfied 
with a lodging in the house of Demir Aga till the 
morrow. Demir, commonly called Demir Dost, 
enjoys a degree of power such as few Albanian 
chiefs possess, and Kardhiki has the consequent 
advantage of internal tranquillity ; for in general 


' Καρδίκιον, Γκαρδίκιον. 


60 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


power is so nearly balanced between the leading 
parties in Albanian towns, that no one chief has 
suficient influence to establish order. The un- 
limited power of Demir over the district of Kard- 
hiki is at present chiefly owing to his good under- 
standing with Aly Pasha. His government, he 
tells me, contains twenty villages, of which there 
are only three or four Greek. One of these is 
Khumelitza, famous for its tobacco, from which a 
snuff is made at Kardhiki, much esteemed by the 
Albanians, who, among other points in which they 
resemble the Highlanders of Scotland, are great 
snuff-takers. There are eight hundred Musulman 
families in Kardhiki, and twenty or thirty Greek 
houses on the opposite side of the ravine. 

The mountains to the westward and northward 
of the district, as far as Khimara, Demir describes 
as inhabited by half-naked wretches living in vil- 
lages, one of the hardiest and poorest races in ex- 
istence: he calls them Gulimidhes, they form a 
subdivision of the great tribe named Liape, in 
Greek Liapidhes, a colony perhaps of the Lapithe 
of Thessaly. One of the villages of the Gulimi- 
dhes, called Poliona, and exactly resembling Pet- 
zari, is in sight from Kardhiki to the north-west, 
near the summit of the mountain. 

The Musulmans of Kardhiki are not less anxious 
to serve the king of England, than the Christians 
of Stepézi ; they observe that the use of the mus- 
ket is their only art and their only property. The 
care of their fields and flocks they leave to the 
Christians. 

Demir gives me a very particular and undoubt- 


II. | EPIRUS. 61 


edly accurate account of the general topography 
of Albania, and of the divisions of its tribes; of 
which the following is the substance : 

Rejecting the political chorography which has 
arisen since the Turkish conquest, the only im- 
portant divisions of the Albanians are four: the 
Ngéghe, Toshke, Liape and Tjame, in Greek Γκέγ- 
κιδες, Τόσκιδες, Λάπιδες, or Λιάμπιδες, and Τᾷζαμιδὲες : 
their respective countries are in Greek written 
Γκεγκεριὰ, Tooxepia, Λιαμπουριὰ, and TZapovora. The 
Ngéghe possess the districts of Skodra, Kavaya, 
Kréya, Tyrana, Duras (in Italian Durazzo), Pekin, 
a part of the district of Elbasan, the two Dibras, 
and Djura on the Drin, Kaurtzova, Kalkandere, 
and Pristina. There is a large proportion of Latin 
Christians of this tribe, called Merdhites, in the 
district of Skodra, who pay sixty paras a house to 
the Pasha of Skodra. They are considered as 
good soldiers as any of the Ngéghe. The Toshke 
extend northward from the frontier of Délvino to 
that of Pekin and Elbasan, bordering to the west 
upon the Liape, and possessing Gardhiki, Arghy- 
rokastro, Libokhovo, Premedi, Dangli, Kolonia, 
Skrapari, Berat, Malakastra, Mizakia, Avléna. 
The Liape inhabit the entire maritime country to 
the southward and westward of the boundaries of 
the Toshke, and as far south as Délvino, where 
begin the Tjame, who occupy all the maritime 
country, as far as Suli inclusive, and inland to the 
Greek districts of Pogéniani and Ioannina. Thus 
it appears that Tepeléni is in Liaburia, and Aly 
Pasha a Liape; but as the whole of this tribe is in 


62 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


disrepute among the other Albanians for their 
poverty and predatory habits, he thinks proper to 
consider Tepeléni a part of Toskeria, and who 
dares dispute his geography ? 

Demir Aga has a khodja in his house, as pre- 
ceptor to his family, who has learned Arabic atCairo, 
Turkish at Constantinople, and Greek at Agrafa. 
Demir takes no pains to conceal his dislike and 
suspicions of Aly, though he has always been on 
good terms with the Pasha, made war in conjunc- 
tion with him against Khérmovo, and is still nomi- 
nally his ally. By these means he maintains his 
authority at home, and hopes to save his country 
from falling entirely into the hands of the Vezir’. 
Aly, he says, has a Jew now in prison at Joannina, 
from whom he has already extracted one hundred 
and forty purses, by threatening him with the loss 
of his head. But this mode of refreshing a trea- 
sury is no novelty in any part of the east; and | 
well remember the noseless and one-eyed victims 
of Djezzar to be seen in the streets of Acre. The 
Pasha never loses an opportunity of gratifying’ his 
resentment against those who took part against 
him in the war of Khérmovo. Only two days 
ago, on the representation of some person that a 
certain Labovite had been active against him on 
that occasion, he sent for the man and his son and 
put them both to death. The son received the 
order after the imprisonment of his father, and 


’ After the massacre which prisoner at Gardhiki, and suf- 
took place at the Khan of Va- fered death at Ioannina. 
liaré in 1812, Demir was taken 


u. | EPIRUS. 63 


obeyed it, though he might easily have escaped, 
and was fully persuaded of the Vezir’s intention. 

At Kardhiki are some ruins of a castle, said to 
have been built by Sultan Bayazid, when he con- 
quered this country, but which is probably more 
ancient. There can be little or no doubt of its 
having been an Hellenic site, though J cannot find 
any remains of those times. The heights around 
the town are, for the most part, clothed with vine- 
yards, producing a pleasant light wine, almost 
colourless, and which the Musulmans of the place 
have no scruple in drinking. Some wheat and 
barley are grown on the lower heights ; the bottom 
of the vale produces scarcely any thing but kalam » 
bokki, the soil being poor and stony, and subject 
to be overflowed by the river. Such situations 
are well adapted to that kind of grain which re- 
quires much moisture to feed its large succulent 
stems, and succeeds best therefore in levels which 
are either inundated by nature in the winter, or 
capable of artificial irrigation in summer; the 
abundant return of the grain also is very accept- 
able to a poor and numerous population like that 
of Albania. It is to the culture of maize and 
tobacco that some of the Albanians chiefly owe 
that skill in the conducting of water, for which 
they are noted in other parts of Turkey, and by 
means of which, as I have before remarked, the 
Liuntzidhes in particular obtain employment at 
Constantinople and other places. 

Jan. 8.—At 8.30 we move from Kardhiki in the 
direction of an opening in the mountains to the 
south-west, called the Pass of Skarfitza; and at 


64 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


9.45 arrive on the bank of the Bélitza, here flow- 
ing to the north, but which, after making the half 
tour of the hill of Kardhiki, has an eastern course 
through the opening of the valley between Khu- 
melitza and Stepézi. Zulati, which stands on the 
left bank of the river, on the lowest heights of the 
mountain, is on the road from Kardhiki to Bordji, 
a castle and village on the sea-coast between 
Nivitza of Délvino and Khimara. In approaching 
the pass of Skarfitza, we have a summit on the 
left, which lies between Arghyrokastro and Dél- 
vino, and near which is the village of Sopoti.. A 
torrent. descends from thence through a woody 
valley called Skotini (dark), which is the resort 
of numerous flocks in summer. Having crossed 
two streams which join the Bélitza to our right, we 
begin soon after ten, the snow falling very thick, 
to ascend the mountain called Pilo-vani, which 
bounds to the east the vale of Kaliasa. The moun- 
tain is clothed with oaks, beeches, and planes, 
and many paths are seen, made by the shepherds 


and the cutters of timber and fire-wood: the oaks . 


are not large. 

The pass of Skarfitza separates the summit 
called Pilo-vani from the mountain of Sopoti, the 
name Skarfitza is specifically applied to a Turkish 
fountain on the summit of the ridge, where the 
road begins to descend towards the plain of Dél- 
vino. At 10.45, not far from that fountain, we 
join the road from Khimara by Zulati to Délvino, 
and then descend by a very difficult passage over 
rocks covered with snow, and along torrents bor- 
dered by planes, until we arrive in sight of Ni- 


11. | EPIRUS. 65 


vitza, and soon afterwards of Kaliasa, in a vale to 
the right. The river Pavla, which enters the 
plain of Finiki below Nivitza, leaves Kaliasa on its 
right bank above the opening. 

At 1 p.m. we come suddenly upon Sénitza, a 
Greek village on the side of the mountain of 
Sopoti, divided only by a ravine from the Turkish 
village Vergo, and looking down upon the plain 
of Délvino. The lower parts of the hills under 
these two places, though worn into the most rug- 
ged forms by the torrents, are richly covered with 
vineyards, mixed with poplars, olives, and cy- 
presses. In the descent, Paleavli (old court), a 
Turkish village, remains to the left, and above 
it the ruins of Kamenitza, which has been in the 
same state beyond the memory of the present race. 
Then turning still more to the eastward we arrive, 
at 4.15, at Délvino, where | reoccupy my lodg- 
ing in the Greek quarter, sending the Albanian 
soldiers and suridjis (postillions), with their horses, 
to find a konak, according to the tenor of the 
Vezir’s letter. 

Jan. 9.—When preparing to set out this morn- 
ing for the Forty Saints, the Bishop of Délvino 
comes to express his regret at my not having made 
his house my lodging, but was not sorry probably 
to escape the inconvenience attending the Turk 
and the horses. The bishop is of opinion, that in 
the district of Délvino, as in most other parts of 
Albania, the Musulmans are nearly equal in num- 
ber to the Christians. 

Sending forward the baggage to the Forty 
Saints, I proceed to Finiki, which lies to the left 

VOL. 1. F 


66 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


of the direct road, about seven miles from Délvino, 
and do not arrive at the Skala until 4 in the 
afternoon. The entire hill of Finiki was sur- 
rounded by Hellenic walls. At the south-eastern 
extremity was the citadel, 200 yards in length, 
some of the walls of which are still extant, from 
twelve to twenty feet in height. The masonry is 
of the third kind, that is to say, it is laid in 
courses, but which are not very regular or equal, 
nor are the stones all quadrangular, although fitted 
to one another with the same nicety as in the 
second, or polygonal, and in the fourth, or most 
regular kind of Hellenic masonry. A stone in one 
of the fragments of wall is eight feet by six on the 
outside, and appears to be nearly as solid. In no 
part are there more than four or five courses re- 
maining. 

The modern village of Finiki, consisting of a 
few huts, lies directly under the citadel to the 
south-west. About the middle of the height is 
the emplacement of a very large theatre, the only 
remains of which are a small piece of rough wall, 
which encircled the back of the upper seats: at 
the bottom in the place of the scene is a small 
circular foundation, apparently that of a tower, 
of a later date. The theatre looked directly to- 
wards the village of the Forty Saints and Corfi. 
Between it and the north-western end of the cita- 
del are the remains of a Roman construction, built in 
courses of tiles, alternating with a masonry formed 
of rough stones, mixed with a great quantity of 
mortar, and faced with square stones laid regularly 
in the mortar, but with the angles instead of the 


17. | EPIRUS. 67 


sides uppermost: this mode of building was not 
uncommon in the decline of the Roman empire, 
and the beginning of that of Constantinople. 
There are some ruins of houses also of a still 
more modern construction, showing that Phcenice 
continued to flourish to a late period, when the 
chief part of the town appears to have been to- 
wards the river Vistritza, which defended this 
height to the eastward, as the Pavla, or river of 
Kaliasa did to the west. 

In agreement with these appearances we find 
Pheenice to have been one of the cities of the 
government of old Epirus’, under the successors 
of Constantine. It was among the places of this 
province, repaired by Justinian, who, as it had 
suffered inconvenience from the lowness of the 
situation, placed the new constructions on a neigh- 
bouring height®. On the hill of the Acropolis I 
find accordingly some remains of columns 7 situ, 
of that polygonal, instead of circular shape, which 
exactly marks the taste of the age of Justinian. 

About the time when the Romans first gained 
a footing in Greece, Pheenice was the strongest, most 
powerful, and richest city in Epirus*; notwithstand- 
ing which, it was taken without a blow by the 
Illyrians, in the year B.C. 230. The ships of 
Agron having gained a victory over the /Xtolians 
on the coast of Acarnania, and brought back a 
rich booty to Illyria, the king, in the height of 
his exultation, indulged to such an excess in the 


" Hierocl, Synecd. Ed. Wess. 2 Procop. de Addif. 1. 4, c. 1. 
p. 652. * Folyb, 1. 2, οἱ 6, 8. 
F 2 


68 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


pleasures of the table, that his death was the 
consequence. His widow, Teuta, who to the in- 
heritance of his authority added a feminine dis- 
regard of consequences’, ordered her officers to 
plunder all the ships which they should meet, and 
thus commissioned them to make war on all the 
world’. Their first object was a descent on Elis 
and Messenia; but the fleet having previously 
anchored on the coast, near Phcenice, for the pur- 
pose of obtaining a supply of provision ὅ, the com- 
manders there entered into a conference with some 
Gallic mercenaries, who, to the number of 800, 
were employed by the Epirotes to garrison Phe- 
nice, and by their assistance made themselves 
masters of the city. 

The Epirotes seem to have — quite prepared 
to receive the Roman yoke; for their imprudence 
in trusting an important charge to a people noto- 
rious for perfidy, was not more remarkable than 
their defective discipline in some of the transac- 
tions which followed, though their first operation 
was well judged. Having collected their forces, 
and taken up a position on the bank of the river 
which flowed by Pheenice, they removed the planks 
of a bridge which communicated with the city, 
with the view of securing their camp against the 
Illyrians within the walls, and then sent ἃ rein- 
forcement to Antigoneia for the defence of the 


* χρωμένη λογισμοῖς yuvat- 2 πᾶσαν ἀποδείξασα πολε-- 
κείοις καὶ πρὸς αὐτὸ τὸ γεγονὸξ μίαν τοῖς ἡγουμένοις. 

εὐτύχημα μόνον ἀποβλέπουσα, ἡ ἐπισιτισμοῦ χάριν.---ο. 5. 
τῶν δ᾽ ἐκτὸς οὐδὲν περισκεπτο- 


μένη. ο. 4. 


ὡ  ωσω ἑλδω“(6 


11. | EPIRUS. 69 


passes of the Aous against Scerdilaidas, a prince 
of the royal family of Illyria, of whose approach 
with 5000 men they had received information. 
Too well satisfied with these precautions, they 
neglected all further vigilance, and indulged with- 
out caution in the plenty which the rich district of 
Pheenice afforded. The Illyrians in the city soon 
took advantage of their fault: issuing at night from 
the town, they replaced the planks of the bridge, 
drove the Epirotes from their position, and the 
next morning beating them in the field, killed and 
captured many, and forced the remainder to retreat 
into Atintania. ‘Soon afterwards Scerdilaidas ar- 
rived at Phcenice, apparently without having en- 
countered the enemy’s forces at the pass of Antigo- 
neia. The Epirotes meantime obtained succour from 
the /Ktolians and Achaians, and again marched 
toward Pheenice. The opposing forces met at a 
place named Helicranum, but no action ensued, 
partly in consequence of the difficulty of the 
ground *, and partly because Teuta, alarmed by a 
defection of a part of the Illyrians to the Dardani, 
had sent orders to recal her forces from Epirus. 
Scerdilaidas, therefore, retraced his steps through 
the pass of Antigoneia’, after having made a treaty 
by which Pheenice, together with the free prisoners, 
were restored to the Epirotes, and the slaves and 
plunder were embarked in the Illyrian ships. So 
great was the booty, and such the encourage- 


1 κι ᾽ , τ τ κα π 
διὰ τὰς δυσχωρίας τῶν πεζῇ πάλιν ἀνεχώρησαν διὰ 
/ ~ ‘ / 
τόπων, c. 6, τῶν παρὰ τὴν ᾿Αντιγόνειαν 
2 « AA ~ 
Oi περὶ τὸν Σκερδιλαΐδαν στεγῶν. 


VOL. I. Ἐῶ +— 


70 EPIRUS. | [CHAP. 


ment which it gave to Teuta, that she thought 
of nothing but plunderiug the cities of Greece, 
while the ungrateful Epirotes soon afterwards 
joined the Acarnanes in an alliance with Illyria 
against their benefactors of Achaia and /&tolia. 
It is probable that the route of Scerdilaidas, both 
in coming and returning, was by the way of Gard- 
hiki and the pass of Skarfitza, and that the Epi- 
rotes retreated as well as returned by the pass of 
Morzena or Délvino, that having been the route 
from Phenice towards Atintania. Helicranum I 
take to have been the modern Délvino, for the 
castle hill at the entrance of a very important pass 
is such a position as could hardly have been left 
unoccupied by the ancients; and the rugged 
ground about it accords exactly with the words of 
the historian. 

The ascertaining of the position of Phenice is ex- 
tremely useful in illustrating the topography of all 
the adjacent part of Chaonia, and greatly assists in 
forming an opinion on the difficult question of the 
site of Antigoneia. How it happened that Scerdilai- 
das met with no opposition at the Antigoneian passes, 
the historian has not stated, but he expressly asserts 
that the prince took this road both in going and in 
returning. As Scodra was the royal residence, we 
cannot doubt that, after crossing the open mari- 
time country of Illyria, he entered the mountains 
of Epirus near Bullis, now Gradista, and followed 
the valley of the Aous to Tepeléni. The only other 
road he could have taken was by the modern Berat 
to Klisira, which was not only more circuitous, but 
more dangerous, since it would have obliged him 





II. | EPIRUS. 71 


to traverse the defile of the Vidsa in its whole length, 
and afterwards that of its tributary the Dryno, above 
the junction, or in other words, the passes both of 
Klisara and of Tepeléni. In the other case he not 
only avoided the pass of Klisara, but followed a 
shorter road. It can hardly be questioned, there- 
fore, that the Stena of Antigoneia intended by Po- 
lybius, was the pass to the southward of Tepeléni 
which leads from that town along the left bank of 
the Dryno towards Arghyrokastro. 

But this could not have been the same pass 
where Philip, son of Demetrius, was defeated by 
the Romans under Quinctius, though Livy de- 
scribes it as being at Antigoneia, and applies to it 
the same Greek word Stena, which Polybius em- 
ploys on the former occasion’; for Philip was not 
defending the approach to Illyria, but that which 
led from the western coast of Epirus through the 
interior of this province into Upper Macedonia and 
Upper Thessaly, whither the Romans proceeded in 
pursuit of the enemy after having forced the Stena. 

It is evident, therefore, upon examining the places 
themselves, that there were two passes, or rather a 
pass with two branches, one of which communi- 
cated from the maritime parts of Epirus in a north- 
erly direction to the maritime plains of Illyria, the 
other leading eastward from the same country to- 
wards Upper Macedonia and Thessaly. The first is 


* Que ad Antigoneam fauces__ on this great event from several 
sunt (Stena vocant Greci). authorities both Greek and 
Liv. 1. 32, c. 5.—Livy hints Latin. 
that he derived his information 


72 EPIRUS. [cHaP. 


that which I have called the pass of Tepeléni; the 
latter is the Stena itself, as the defile is still called, 
which conducts along the Vidsa from Tepeléni by 
Dragéti and Klisura into the valley of Premedi. 
Antigoneia having given name to both passes, can 
only be sought for near their junction, where 
Tepeléni is the only place which has the appear- 
ance of an ancient site. We can arrive therefore 
at no other conclusion than that here stood Anti- 
goneia. It may be admitted that in this case An- 
tigoneia was too distant from the entrance of the 
Stena effectually to command that pass, but it en- 
tirely obstructs the other, and standing on a com- 
manding height at the junction of a tributary, with 
the Aous, just at the point where the straits expand 
into a more open and fertile valley, it has all the 
requisites for the situation of a town of that import- 
ance which, from the ancient authorities, we may 
presume Antigoneia to have been’. 

The next question in the comparative geography 
of this part of Epirus is the situation of Phanote. 
In the winter of the year 170—169 B.C., Appius 
Claudius, anxious to repair the effects of his 
defeat in Illyria, marched from thence into Epi- 
rus, and laid siege to Phanote. But hearing 
soon afterwards that Perseus had entered Aito- 
lia, and attacked Stratus, which was then de- 
fended by Popilius and his A%tolian allies, he 
raised the siege of Phanote, and began his retreat 


1 The name sounds as if it may have replaced one more 
were not more ancient than the ancient. 
third century B.C., when it 


12 


I. EPIRUS.. 73 


towards the plain of Eleon'. Clevas, the officer 
of Perseus, who with a strong garrison defended 
Phanote, followed the Romans, and, attacking 
them on a difficult road, by which they were 
obliged to pass along the foot of the mountains, 
killed 1000 and took 200 prisoners. Clevas, con- 
certing operations with Philostratus, one of the 
Epirotes, who had endeavoured to betray Hostilius 
into the hands of Perseus in the preceding year, 
then crossed into the district of Antigoneia, and 
began to plunder the country, with a view to draw 
the garrison of Antigoneia into a valley, where 
Philostratus was placed in readiness to fall upon 
them. The stratagem completely succeeded, and 
the garrison of Antigoneia sustained a loss almost 
as great as that of Claudius. Clevas then moved 
towards the camp of Claudius in the plain of 
Eleon; but the latter had no inclination to engage, 
and finding that nothing was to be gained in Epi- 
rus, he dismissed his Epirote allies, and returned 
with the Italians into Ulyricum. 

Every circumstance in these transactions tends 
to show that Gardhiki was the site of Phanote. 
The strength and remarkable situation of that 
town, in the midst of a valley surrounded by an 
amphitheatre of mountains, through which there 
are only two narrow passes, are a sufficient pre- 
sumption that it was the site of one of the prin- 
cipal fortresses of Chaonia, and the position 
midway between the channel of Corcyra and the 
Antigoneian passes would render it particularly 


* in campo quem Elezona vocant.—c. 23, 1. 43. 


74 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


important to the Romans advancing from Illyria ; 
and naturally the first object of Claudius, Antigo- 
neia being already in the hands of the Romans or 
their allies. 

The name of Phanote again occurs in a transac- 
tion which took place a few months earlier, and from 
which we learn that the most important military 
point on the Aous, in the line of communication be- 
tween Macedonia and Epirus, was a bridge across 
that river, which, as Antigoneia is not mentioned on 
this occasion, would seem not to have been at that 
place or commanded by it. The consul, A. Hos- 
tilius Mancinus, proceeding to assume the com- 
mand of the Roman armies in Thessaly, had ar- 
rived from Italy at Phanote, when the Epirote 
faction, adverse to the Romans, thought the time 
and place favorable to a design which they con- 
ceived of betraying Hostilius to Perseus, whom 
they urged by letters to hasten his march towards 
Epirus. But the Molossi, who were well disposed 
to the Romans, seized the bridge of the Aous, with 
the determination of preventing the Macedonians 
from crossing the river. Meantime the conspiracy 
was discovered, and revealed to Hostilius by his 
host, Nestor, of Oropus, upon which he returned 
to the sea-coast, embarked from thence for Anti- 
cyra, in the Corinthiac Gulf, and by that route 
proceeded into Thessaly '. 

Applying this narrative to the country along the 
banks of the Vidsa, and to the general geography 


* Polyb. 1. 27, c. 14. Néo- Nestor was perhaps from Oro- 
τορι τῷ ᾿Ωρωπίῳ, as Gronovius pus of Thesprotia, mentioned 
has suggested, not Κρωπίῳ. by Stephanus in voce. 


II. | EPIRUS. 75 


of Northern Greece, there can scarcely be a doubt 
that the bridge alluded to by Livy was in the 
Stena, about midway between Klistra and Tepe- 
léni, where the communication is now carried on 
by means of two bridges. 

The route from Kardhiki towards Arghyro- 
kastro, along the foot of the mountain, by Khume- 
litza, corresponds exactly to that in which Claudius 
was attacked by Clevas, if we suppose the plain 
Elon to have been that between Arghyrdkastro 
and Libékhovo, and Claudius to have pitched his 
camp about midway between those two towns. 
The name of the plain leon seems to show that 
a city Eleus, which Ptolemy classes with Pheenice 
and Antigoneia among the interior cities of Chao- 
nia’, occupied a position in this valley ; and the 
name is the more remarkable, as we may suppose 
it to have been originally derived from the abund- 
ance of olive-trees in the district, in which respect 
it is well adapted to this valley of the Dryno; for 
although surrounded by lofty mountains covered 
with snow during a great part of the year, and one 
of the coldest parts of Epirus, the valley itself is 
one of the few situations in Greece or Albania, dis- 
tant from the sea, where olive-trees are now found. 
The town of Eleus was probably situated on the 
heights, opposite to Arghyrdkastro, where it is 
said that some remains of Hellenic walls still exist. 
The small theatre, and other ancient vestiges in 
the plain below Libokhovo, being of Roman con- 
struction, could not have existed at the time of the 


’ Ptolem. 1. 3, c. 14. 


[CHAP. 


76 EPIRUS. 


transactions related by Livy. They mark probably 
the position of a city which was founded by Ha- 
drian and repaired by Justinian; and thence named 
first Hadrianopolis, and afterwards, but probably 
for a short time, Justinianopolis. Mention of Ha- 
drianopolis occurs only in some authorities of the 
Byzantine empire of the sixth and seventh centu- 
ries, at which time it was one of the cities of the 
government of Old Epirus, as well as the see of a 
bishopric’. The only authority which gives any 
indication of its exact situation is the Tabular 
Itinerary. In this document there are two roads 
from Apollonia to Nicopolis: one (noticed also in 
the Antonine) which led near the sea-coast by the 
Acroceraunia, Phoenice, and Buthrotum ; the other 
by Amantia and Hadrianopolis, which last is placed 
about midway between the two extremities of the 
road *. One route, therefore, passed through the 
plain of Délvino; the other, if Amantia was at 
Nivitza, ascended the vale of the Sdatzista to that 
position, and from the head of the valley crossed by 
Pregonati, into the plain of Arghyroékastro, which 
it followed in its entire length. It would, therefore, 
have passed exactly by the theatre, which stands not 


! Procop. de Atdif. 1. 4, ¢. 1. 
Act. Concil.—Hierocl. Synecd. 
Wessel. p. 651.—Tab. Peutin- 
ger, Segm. V. 

* Aulona Apollonia xxv. ; ad 
Acroceraunia xxiii.; Phoenice 
xli.; Butroto lvi.; Glycis Limen 
xxx.; Actia Nicopoli xx. ;— 
Anton. It. Wessel. p. 329, 324. 


Apollonia xvi Aulona xxxiii 
Acroceraunia xli Pheenice lvi 
Butharotum viii ad Dianam xiii 
Ciclis Limen xx Actia Nico- 
poli. Apollonia xxx Amantia 
ly MHadrianopoli xxiv Ilio 
xii xlv Actia 
Nicopoli. — Tab. Peutinger, 
ibid. 


e 8 re o's “δε υ 


IT. | EPIRUS. , 77 


very far from the middle distance between Apol- 
lonia and Nicopolis. No great accuracy is to be 
expected on this point, as several of the distances 
in both the Itineraries are obviously erroneous. 

The only objection to this position of Hadriano- 
polis is, that ten or twelve miles lower down the 
river are the ruins called Drynopolis, which name 
may easily be taken fora corruption of Hadriano- 
polis. These remains, however, and the theatre, 
are productions of two very different periods of 
time. The latter is a work of the Pagans during 
the Roman empire. Drynopolis was a fortress or 
small town of the Byzantine empire ; the probabi- 
lity, therefore, is, that when Hadrianopolis fell to 
ruin, Drynopolis was built upon a different site, 
and became the see of the bishopric, first named 
from Hadrianopolis, then from Drynopolis, and 
which, after the ruin of the latter, was trans- 
ferred to Arghyrokastro. Nor is Drynopolis a 
corruption of Hadrianopolis, but taken from the 
river on which it is situated, still called Dhryno, 
or Drino, or Druno, which may possibly be the 
ancient name still preserved of this branch of the 
Aous, and derived either from δρῦς or from some 
native word which has given name also to another 
large river of Albania, the Drin, which flows from 
the lake of ‘Akhridha into the Adriatic. As to 
Deropoli, or Derdpugl, although this appellation 
is sometimes applied to the river, it belongs pro- 
perly to the whole valley, and may perhaps be a 
corruption of Hadrianopolis, to which all this ex- 
tensive plain probably belonged when the city was 
in its most flourishing condition. 


78 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


Although Arghyrokastro has no very marked 
appearance of an ancient site, the name may pos- 
sibly be derived from that of the Argyrini, whom 
Lycophron’, and two Greek authors cited by Ste- 
phanus’, show to have been an Epirote people, 
and whom Lycophron leads us to look for in the 
northern part of Epirus, as he couples them with 
the Acro Ceraunii: in fact the word ᾿Αργύρινος is 
still sometimes applied to a native of Arghyré- 
kastro. 

Jan. 10.—The scirocco has been constant at the 
Forty Saints since my departure, and the boat in 
which 1 crossed the channel was not able to return 
to Corfu till four days ago. Having prevailed 
upon the crew of another Corfiote boat, which had 
just arrived in the harbour with a lading of val- 
lonéa for Corfa, to defer their passage thither 
until they have taken me to Palérimo and back, 
we sail for that port at 9.30 a.m., and arrive there 
at ὦ. The distance is about eighteen miles; the 
wind was a gentle Onchesmite, like that which 
carried over Cicero to Brundusium. 

Between the Liméni of the Forty Saints and 


Ty δ᾽ ἐκ Λιβύσσης αὖθις ἐμπίπτων νότος 
" 3 7 \ , ΄ 
Εἰς ᾿Αργυρίνους καὶ Κεραυνίων νάπας 
Αξει, βαρεῖ πρηστῆρι κυμαίνων ἅλα, 
Ἔνθα πλανήτην λυπρὸν ὄψονται βίον, 
Λακμωνίου πίνοντες Αἴαντος ῥοάς. 


Lycophr. v. 1016. 


? *Apyuptvot, ἔθνος Ἤπειρω- Κεραυνίων νάπας. --- Stephan. 
τικὸν ὡς Τίμαιος καὶ Θέων καὶ ἴῃ voce. 
Λυκόφρων. Eic Αργυρίνους καὶ 


m1. | EPIRUS. 79 


Spilia, or the Skala of Nivitza, there are several 
small creeks where boats may find shelter. Spilia 
is a creek at the mouth ofa glen, where stands the 
ruin of a magazine which was destroyed by Aly 
Pasha when at war with Nivitza. Beyond it is 
Lakovo, asmall village on the side of the mountain, 
surrounded with terraces of vines and corn; two 
or three miles beyond which is Pikérnes, some- 
what larger ; and two miles further Sopotd. Below 
Laikovo and Pikérnes are sandy beaches, where 
boats anchor, and may be stranded in bad weather. 
Sopotd stands in a glen, and has a castle named 
Bordji, on the top of a steep rock commanded by 
Hadji Beddoé Aga, a partizan of the Vezir. Here are 
the only Turkish families on this coast. Behind So- 
poto a river descends in a very deep and rocky ra- 
vine. A little farther north is Kiepero, on the edge 
of a steep precipice, below which are a few fields, 
terminating in a beach which is separated from 
Port Palérimo only by the point which shelters that 
harbour to the southward and eastward. Palérimo, 
the ancient Panormus, which Strabo describes as a 
great harbour in the midst of the Ceraunian moun- 
tains, and thus clearly distinguishes from the Pa- 
normus of Oricum’, is divided into two bays by a 
rocky peninsula, projecting into the middle of it, 


1 Ὠρικὸν, ἡ ἀκρώρεια τῶν κόλπον" ἐν τούτῳ δ᾽ ἐστὶ τῷ δια- 
᾿Ακροκεραυνίων ὀρέων, Πάνορ- στήματι Πάνορμός τε, λιμὴν 
μος λιμὴν," Ογχησμος λιμήν. μέγας ἐν μέσοις τοῖς Κεραυνίοις 

Ptolem. 1. 3,¢. 14. ὄρεσι, καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα" Ογχησμος, 

Εἰσὶ χίλιοι καὶ τριακόσιοι λιμὴν ἄλλος, καθ᾽ ὃν τὰ δυσμικὰ 

στάδιοι ἀπὸ τῶν Κεραυνίων ἐπὶ ἄκρα τῆς Κορκυραίας ἀντίκειται. 


τὸ στόμα τοῦ ᾿Αμβρακικοῦ Strabo, p. 324. 


80 EPIRUS. 7 [CHAP. 


on the summit of which stands the kastro, or for- 
tress. This castle is nothing more than a small 
square enclosure containing a house, a church, and 
two four-pounders. Having brought a letter to the 
Bulu-bashi, or commandant, I land as soon as we 
arrive, and take shelter from the rain in his small 
apartment, which is the only one in the place 
having a chimney. On the side of the hills bor- 
dering the southern division of the port are a few 
cornfields and vineyards, which, together with 
some sheep on the hills, are tended by the ten 
soldiers who garrison the fort. Five of these are 
Musulmans, including the Bulu-bashi and his son; 
the others are Greeks. At the extremity of the 
northern harbour the hills are well cultivated, but 
these form part of the territory of the town of Khi- 
mara, which possesses the exclusive right of fishery 
in that division of the bay. 

A gale accompanied with rain, which comes on 
at night from the south-east, brings a ship of 
Dultjani, in Italian, Dulcigno’, into the harbour, 
bound to that place from Alexandria. As the 
Dulciniotes have the reputation of being inclined 
to piracy, the garrison is alarmed, and prepares 
for defence. Indeed theyhad already been put upon 
the alert by our arrival, for our boat being from 
Corfu, the governor suspected some Russian treach- 
ery, and before my cot was conveyed into the castle, 
it was searched, lest it should contain concealed 
arms. | | 
Last summer a French pirate boat, which was 


1 Written in modern Greek, Ντουλτζοῦνι :---- [πὸ ancient 
Olcinium, 


TT. | EPIRUS. 8] 


afterwards destroyed at Fant by one of the British 
ships of war on this station, put into Palérimo, 
after having plundered some Maltese vessels under 
English colours ; the Khimariotes formed a design 
of attacking it, on the plea of its being a pirate, 
but probably with a view of plunder ; not agreeing 
however among themselves, the project failed. 
Jan. 11.—The wind shifts to the westward, and 
the weather clears up at noon. At 1, accompanied 
by a servant, and preceded by one of the Corfiote 
boatmen and a guard from the castle, I proceed 
on foot to Khimara, no beasts of burthen being pro- 
curable, and the road scarcely admitting of their 
being employed. The captain of the Dulciniote, a 
bearded Turk, about seventy years of age, had 
offered to land me in the Bay of Khimara, and thus 
to save the detour along the side of the mountain ; 
but when we came alongside his ship, his authority 
proved insufficient to obtain a party to row the 
boat. It appears that they are afraid of the Khima- 
riotes. After crossing the ridge at the extremity 
of the northern bay, and climbing along the side 
of the hills which overhang the sea beyond it, we 
arrive at the end of an hour’s walk from the castle, 
upon a little valley and beach where are some 
flocks. To the right, the sides of the mountains 
are grown with velanidhiés, or oaks, which pro- 
duce the vallonea'; they still preserve their last 
year’s leaves, but can hardly be called evergreens. 
We meet some shepherds to whom the sailor, with 
a few words of greeting, presents his snuff-box, the 


‘ ἡ Βελανιδιὰ, Quercus Aigilops. 
VOL. Ff. G 


82 EPIRUS. | CHAP. 


common compliment in Albania, and in these in- 
dependent districts a necessary propitiation. In 
return the shepherds call off their dogs, which had 
made a general charge upon us. 

We soon arrive in sight of Khimara, situated on 
the top of a pointed hill, and enter upon the cul- 
tivated land which surrounds it, consisting of ex- 
tensive vineyards, some fields of wheat just spring- 
ing up, and others of barley, which the peasants 
are ploughing, and will sow as soon as they can 
catch a short interval of fair weather. Ona high 
summit under the mountains on the right is a 
monastery of the Panaghia, on the left the port 
of Khimara, near the shore of which are some 
water-mills, turned by a rivulet from the moun- 
tain. The harbour is exposed to the west, but 
affords good shelter to small vessels from any other 
wind, and has a fine beach. There is another more 
open spiaggia, two miles farther to the north, im- 
mediately below the town, where boats are hauled 
up on the beach. Here is a small plain which, 
with the side of the hill between this plain and the 
village, is the best cultivated part of the territory 
of Khimara. Immediately below the village are 
some gardens, containing vines, olives, cypresses, 
and fruit-trees. 

At half-past three we arrive at the house of 
Capt. Zakharias, the son of George’, vulgarly 
called Zakho-Ghidérghi, for whom I have a letter 
of introduction from Z. the collector, my host of the 
Forty Saints. The house is as humble a dwelling 


* Ζαχαρίας Tewpyiov. 


II. | EPIRUS. 83 


as any captain’s in Albania. In the inner room a 
fire in the middle of the floor, and a mattrass 
spread by the side of it, are the luxuries speedily 
arranged for me. Capt. George, who has attained 
the ordinary bounds of life, and has never been 
absent from his native village except three years 
passed in the Neapolitan service, expresses his de- 
light at seeming an Englishman here for the first 
time. Two Germans some years ago, calling 
themselves Englishmen, left a certificate with 
Capt. Constantine Andratzi, which proves the 
imposture. Capt. Z.’s family consists of a son, 
the widow of another son killed in the service of 
the King of Naples, and two or three of his chil- 
dren. All are employed in preparing supper, but 
principally the widow. The dishes are baked, and 
a dingy towel spread close to the cinders, serves 
both for table and tablecloth. The Captain, and 
the sailor from the boat, who is honoured as a 
guest, are the only persons who join the table. 
After supper all the heads of houses friendly to 
Zakho-Ghidrghi come in and seat themselves cross- 
legged around the fire. They relate their adven- 
tures in the Neapolitan or other services, for most 
of the Khimariotes seek a livelihood as soldiers 
abroad. One states that he was in the war of Italy 
with Buonaparte, who made many inquiries of him 
concerning this part of Albania, and told him at 
Trieste, that he meant to send 40,000 men to 
Corfu, and as many more to Avléna. They all 
speak with pride of their liberty, meaning their 
exemption from Turkish oppression, at the same 
time that they lament their own internal anarchy 
α 2 


84 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


and dissensions, and agree that they should be 
happy to receive the blessing of good government 
from the hands of any sovereign in Europe except 
the Turk, whom they are always determined to 
resist. They neither pay the kharat] nor any 
other tax, except a contribution of thirty paras a 
head per annum to Ibrahim Pasha of Berat, for the 
liberty of trading to his ports. The right of pas- 
turage on the lands of the town of Khimara, that 
of gathering velanidhi on the mountains, and that 
of fishing in the northern bay of Palérimo are en- 
joyed in common by all the inhabitants. Maize 
is grown in the plain adjacent to the northern 
beach, where the two torrents, which embrace the 
town, overflow in the winter, and prepare the land 
for receiving that grain. Wheat is produced within 
the territory, more than sufficient for the annual 
consumption of the place in favorable seasons ; 
but for two or three years past they have hardly 
reaped enough for six months. Velanidhi, a small 
quantity of wheat in good years, and sometimes a 
little wine, which is of a dry kind and without 
flavour, are the only exports. The mountain 
behind Khimara is said to abound in firs suited for 
masts, which might be brought down at a small 
expense, and would be a profitable undertaking, if 
poverty and dissension admitted of it. 

The village, or city as the natives are pleased 
to qualify it, of Khimara’, more commonly pro- 
nounced according to the Italian κακοφωνία Tjimara, 
contains 300 families: divided into five principal 


* Χειμάβα. 


I. | EPIRUS. 85 


alliances called parentie in Italian, and in Greek 
φρατρίαις, a classical word which I hardly expected 
to find in Albania. With one or other of these, all 
the inferior families are in alliance. The fratries 
are, 1. The Lyganates', consisting of sixty or 
seventy houses, at the head of which is Alexdd- 
hemo’, son of Aléxi; 2. The Tzakanates’, of 
which my host Zakho-Ghiérghi is the πρῶτος : it 
has upwards of eighty houses ; 3. The Koykadhes*, 
of which Zakharias Andrttzu? is the chief: of these 
there are about forty-five houses ; 4. The Mazates®, 
of whom John Tragynus’ is the chief; and, 5. The 
Κοκουρτάδες, of whom Andrew Polus® is the head. 
The first and second are the only families, at pre- 
sent, who are not on speaking terms, but last August 
there was a scuffle with sabres between Constan- 
tine, the brother of the chief of the third family, 
and Alexédhemo, the head of the first, in which 
some wounds were received before the quarrel was 
adjusted, and the contending parties restored to an 
exchange of words. Another brother of the An- 
dratzi is now lieutenant-colonel of one of the regi- 
ments of Cacciatori Albanesi in the Neapolitan 
service. His major is a native of the town of 
Vuno. Constantine Andritzi informs me that he 
was twenty-eight years in the Neapolitan service, 
that he deserted to the French when they took 
Naples, but that not obtaining any employment or 
encouragement from them, he returned to his 


* Avyavdrec. > Ζαχαρίας Ανδρούτζου, or ᾽Αν- 
2 ᾿Αλεξόδημος ᾿Αλεξίου. τρούτζου. 6 MaZarec. 
3 Tlakavarec. " Ἰωάννης Τραγύνους. 


* Κωγυκαάδες. * Ανδρέας Πόλους. 


86 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


native country. When General Villettes was rais- 
ing a corps of Albanians for the British service, 
C. Andritzi was sent for to Corfa to agree upon the 
terms on the part of the Khimariotes. He speaks 
and reads Italian and French, is tolerably informed 
on the history and antiquities of this country, wishes 
much to enter the English service, and asserts that 
we may easily raise a body of 800 Khimariotes 
from the free villages of Khimara, and, with the 
permission of the Turks, twice that number in the 
neighbouring districts. 

There are about 100 pensioners of the King of 
Naples in the town, officers included, who are paid 
by Capt. Zakho, for which purpose he visits Corft 
every year to receive the pay from the Neapolitan 
consul, whose agent he is. He receives a pension 
of twelve ducats a month for his own military ser- 
vices, four more for the consolato or agency, and 
eight ducats for the widow of a son who fell in the 
service. So handsome a provision after a short 
personal service can only be considered as intended 
to secure an influential agent in the place, for 
Zakho-Ghidérghi is looked up to as the chief man 
in Khimara by all except those who side with the 
Lyganates, and who, of course, consider Alexéd- 
hemo the chief. The feud between the two parties 
is of long standing; the most remarkable contest 
occurred ten or twelve years ago, when many lives 
are said to have been lost. The heads of the fra- 
tries are those who possess the largest proportion of 
vineyards, cornfields, and flocks; and they form 
the council of the family league. Between friendly 
fratries disputes are easily made up, though even 

12 


II. | EPIRUS. 87 


among them the foundation and last resource of 
the law is the lex talionis. Asin Arabia, a murder 
may be acquitted for money. At Khimara 2000 
Turkish piastres are the usual price of blood ; at the 
next village of Vuno it is 1000. Until this be paid 
the retaliation goes on. The power of the heads 
of families, Capt. Zakho observes, is merely the 
influence of property and character, and is neither 
asserted nor acknowledged. ‘‘ That man,” point- 
ing to an attendant, ‘“‘ though he receives his pay 
from me, will do nothing I order unless he pleases.” 
He shows, however, at the same time, that he can 
desire the man to bring his kapa and lay it on his 
shoulders. There are several soldiers here on leave 
of absence, during which they receive their pay. 
One has a twelvemonth’s leave. The pay of a 
private is 28 grani per diem; that of a serieant- 
major 34; of a captain 80 ducats a month; of a 
lieutenant-colonel 110; but they find their own 
arms and clothes. A Neapolitan soldier has not 
half as much. There are three or four Khimariote 
captains now recruiting here for their corps at 
Naples. 

The Khimariotes often intermarry with the people 
of Vuno, the territory of which is separated only 
from that of Khimara by the crest of the ridge to 
the north-westward, which looks down upon υπό. 
But notwithstanding these alliances, the two towns 
are generally on terms of suspicion, and often in 
open hostility. This, indeed, is the ordinary con- 
dition of two neighbouring towns in Albania, and, 
by a natural consequence, those which are sepa- 
rated from one another by a third territory are 


88 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


generally in alliance, which in fact is not uncom- 
mon on a larger scale in other parts of the world. 

The name of Khimara is generally applied to 
the whole of the ancient Acroceraunian ridge, from 
Cape Kefali to Cape Glossa, including the valley 
of Oricum. The towns are in the following order 
from south to north: Nivitza, Lakovo, Pikérnes, 
Sopotd, Kiepero, Khimara, Vundé, Dhrymadhes, 
Palasa, and Dukadhes. All these places stand 
on the western slope of the Acroceraunia, except — 
Dukadhes, which looks to the Gulf of <Aulon. 
There are also a few smaller villages in Khimara, 
one of which, named Piliuri, is in sight from the 
town of Khimara to the eastward, towards the 
summit of the mountain, in a pass leading to the 
Turkish village of Kutzi. At Corfa 1 met a cer- 
tain Count Gika’, of Dhrymadhes, who described 
that place as very picturesque, with a river run- 
ning through it; and added, that near Dukddhes 
are forests of fine oaks and pines, furnishing tim- 
ber which might easily be brought down the hills 
into the lagoon of Erikho. All the towns have 
nearly the same semi-barbarous manners and cus- 
toms. The Greek language is spoken by almost 
all the men, and the Italian by those who have 
lived abroad ; but the women in general know 
little of any language but the Albanian. 

Khimara being situated on a steep rocky height, 
protected on either side by the ravine of a torrent, 
and having all its exterior houses prepared for 
defence, has by its strength hitherto served as a 


1 Tkikac. 


~ 


IL. | EPIRUS. 89 


barrier to all the northern part of the district 
against the arms of Aly Pasha. Three or four 
years ago, the Khimariotes fought with his troops 
on the hill above Palérimo. More recently, on 
visiting the latter place, he proposed to purchase 
a piece of land from the Khimariotes, for the 
purpose of building a castle, which they wisely 
refused. He has often recommended this harbour 
to the use of British ships; his principal object 
in which, as he confessed to me, is that by this 
appearance of support from us, he may find it 
more easy to bring the Khimariotes under his 
yoke. It was in a manner somewhat similar that 
he obtained Nivitza and Aio Vasili; and thus it 
is that he always endeavours, in his transactions 
with the-powers of Europe, to convert them into 
instruments of his own aggrandizement. From 
Khimara to Tepeléni is reckoned a four days’ 
journey in this season, though the direct distance 
is not more than 20 G. miles: the first day is to 
Kutzi, the third to Nivitza on the Satzista, which, 
like the other streams of this country, is difficult 
to pass in seasons of rain. Nivitza is inhabited 
by Musulman Liape, and is described as situated 
on a peaked rock, surrounded by deep ravines and 
torrents, where considerable remains of ancient 
walls are preserved, and in the castle particularly 
an entire door. It is agreed by all who have 
seen these walls, that they exactly resemble some 
pieces of Hellenic work, which now serve as foun- 
dations to several of the modern houses of Khi- 
mara. The masonry approaches to a regular kind 
not any of the blocks of stone having more 


90 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


than five sides. These relics, together with the 
name, Jeave no question that Khimara stands upon 
the exact site of the ancient Chimera, which I 
believe is noticed only by Pliny. I was informed 
of an inscription in a private house, but as it 
belonged to one of the adverse faction, 1 could 
not obtain permission to see it. 

Jan. 12.—As neither the season, nor the en- 
gagements of the boat in which 1 came to Palé- 
rimo, nor the doubtful politics and civilization of 
the Ceraunians, will admit of my exploring Khi- 
mara any farther, still less of being able by this 
route to examine the topography of Amantia, 
Oricum, Bullis, or Apollonia, I am under the 
necessity of returning to Palérimo and Corfa. 
The people of Dukadhes, who possess the valley 
above Oricum, are the principal difficulty, having 
a reputation something like that of the Kakovuli- 
otes of Mani. 

Though the wind is favorable this morning for 
returning by sea to the Forty Saints, and the 
weather delightful, Captain Zakharias, pushing 
the laws of hospitality to a semi-barbarous ex- 
tent, will not allow me to walk back to Palé- 
rimo, until a lamb, which he sends for from 
the hills, has been baked and served up on the 
floor. 

After this Homeric breakfast we descend to 
Palérimo, accompanied for two miles by Captain 
Constantine Andrutzi: two guards, formerly Nea- 
politan soldiers, armed with musquets, walk with 
us as far as the boundary of the territory, between 
the northern Bay of Palérimo and the isthmus of 


11. | EPIRUS. 91 


the castle. Here, having received a present, they 
fire off their musquets and return. We embark 
at 2 p.m. with a light northerly breeze, which 
soon falls to a calm; and, rowing all the way, 
arrive at half-past nine at the Forty Saints by a 
fine moonlight. 

In all this part of Albania it is a prevailing 
idea, not uncommon also in many parts of Greece, 
that the country formerly belonged to the Spa- 
niards, and that all the ruins are the work of that 
people; those at the Forty Saints, the castle of 
Délvino, the ruins in the plain of Derdpugl, the 
remains of an old Turkish castle at Tepeléni, and 
even the Hellenic walls of Phcenice are supposed 
to be of Spanish construction. It is difficult to 
understand how this opinion originated, for the 
Catalans, the only Spaniards who made any per- 
manent settlements in Greece, were not in this 
quarter, nor can any one of the ruins in Epirus 
with any probability be ascribed to them. 

I had made an agreement with the Corfiotes to 
proceed to Vutzindré, and Parga, and from thence 
to Corfu, but this being the Greek new year’s 
day, and feast of St. Basil, the sailors get drunk 
and insolent, and the bargain breaks off. 

Jan. 14.—Having found another vessel, we sail 
along the coast to the Bay of Buthrotum, passing 
between the two rocks off Kassopo, which are such 
a dangerous impediment to the safe navigation of 
this channel. They lie midway between the castle 
of Kassépo and a wide bay on the shore of Epirus, 
which is separated only from the lake of Vutzin- 
dr6é by a long ridge of land, not broader in some 


92 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


parts than a mile. The bay is called Examili, in 
allusion to the isthmus, that name being often 
attached by the modern Greeks to an isthmus, 
whatever may be its breadth. It is thus applied 
to the Isthmus of Corinth, and to that of the 
Thracian Chersonese, near Cardia. The Bay of 
Examili is open and exposed to the west, but the 
southern part is well sheltered by four islets, 
which have given to the anchorage within them 
the name of Tetranisa. Beyond this there is a 
rugged coast, parallel to the eastern extremity 
of Corfu, and forming with it the narrowest part 
of the channel. The most projecting point on 
the continent is probably the Cape Posidium of 
Ptolemy and Strabo’. Between Onchesnius and 
Posidium, Ptolemy places a Cassiope, which he 
clearly distinguishes from the Cassiope of Cor- 
cyra, by describing the former as a harbour, the 
latter as a town and promontory *. Cassiope of 
Epirus, therefore, if Ptolemy is correct, would 


* Πάνορμος λιμήν, Oyxnopoc 
λιμήν, Κασσιόπη λιμήν, Uosi- 
διον ἄκρον, Βουθρωτὸν κόλπος, 
Πηλώδης Auhyv.—Ptolem. 1. 3. 
6. 14. 

Ἐν τούτῳ δ᾽ ἐστὶ τῷ διαστή- 
ματι Πάνορμός τε λιμὴν μέγας 
ἐν μέσοις τοῖς Κεραυνίοις ὄρεσι" 
καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα "ογχησμος λι- 
μὴν ἄλλος, καθ᾽ ὃν τὰ δυσμικὰ 
ἄκρα τῆς Κορκυραίας ἀντίκειται" 
καὶ πάλιν ἄλλος Κασσιόπη, ἀφ᾽ 
οὗ ἐπὶ Βρεντέσιον χίλιοι ἑπτα- 


,ὔ , ᾿ ε > of 4φ( \ 
κύσιοι στάδιοι" οἱ δ᾽ ἴσοι Kal ἐπὶ 


Τάραντα ἀπὸ ἄλλου ἀκρωτηρίου 
γοτιωτέρου τῆς Κασσιόπης ὃ 
Mera δὲ 
"Ογχησμον ἸΠοσίδιον καὶ Bov- 


καλοῦσι Φάλακρον. 


θρωτὸν ἐπὶ τῷ στόματι Πηλώ- 
dove λιμένος.---ϑίχαθο, p. 824. 

5. Κασσιόπη πόλις καὶ ἄκρα. 
—Ptolem. ibid. For the Cas- 
siope of Corcyra and its temple 
of Jupiter Casius, see Plin. 
1. 4, c. 12. Sueton. in Neron. 
c. 22. Procop. de B. Goth. 
1. 4, ο. 22. and some of the 
coins of Corcyra. 


I. | EPIRUS. 93 


seem to have stood in the harbour of Tetranisa. 
It is on the strength of this evidence of Ptolemy, 
that Strabo has been supposed to allude to a 
Cassiope on the coast of Epirus, in stating 
that the distance from port Cassiope to Brun- 
dusium was 1700 stades. I have little doubt, 
however, that he intended the harbour of Cas- 
siope in Corcyra, from whence it is more pro- 
bable that vessels should begin their passage to 
Italy, than from any port on the Epirote coast 
to the southward of Onchesmus. If Strabo did 
not intend a place in Corcyra, why should he 
have described Phalacrum, (which we know from 
Ptolemy and Stephanus to have been a promontory 
of that island), as lying to the southward of Cas- 
slope; or why should he have returned to On- 
chesmus before he described the ports of Posidium 
and Buthrotum? This seems clearly to show that 
all which occurs between his first mention of On- 
chesmus, and his return to it, relates to Corcyra 
only ; that his Cassiope was the modern Kassdépo, 
and his Phalacrum the north-western point of 
Corfa. It is true that this cape is nearly due west 
of Kassopo, instead of being to the south; but 
errors of bearing are among the most common of 
ancient inaccuracies. Strabo’s distance of 1700 
stades cannot assist in deciding the question, be- 
cause the difference of distance from Brindisi to 
Kassopo in (ον, or from Brindisi to any point 
on the Epirote coast, is too small on so long a line 
to lead to any certainty, especially in reference to 
so incorrect an authority or text as those of Strabo, 


94 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


His imperfect knowledge of the general form of 
these coasts is shown, not only by his mistaken 
bearing of Phalacrum from Cassiope, but by his 
statement also that the distance from Phalacrum 
to Tarentum is equal to that from Cassiope to 
Brundusium, there being a great excess in the 
former line whether the latter be measured from 
the coast of Corcyra, or from that of Epirus. As 
to the mention supposed to have been made by 
other authors beside Ptolemy, of a Cassiope in 
Epirus, it is clear that they all, without exception, 
intended the Cassope, of which the territory bor- 
dered on the Ambracic Gulf ?. 

If Phalacrum was the north-western cape of 
Corfa, the southern extremity, or Cavo Bianco, 
was probably the Amphipagus of Ptolemy’; for 
although the words Leucimne and Bianco have a 
similar import, the modern name Aléfkimo is a 
much stronger proof of the identity of the ancient 
Leucimne with the low cape advancing into the 
channel of Corfa, cight miles to the northward of 
Cape Bianco. The name Amphipagus corresponds 
to such an abrupt and rocky height as Cavo Bi- 
anco, and with the more propriety, as it 15 a con- 
trast to the low sandy promontory of Aléfkimo. 
It is observable also, that the placing of Amphi- 
pagus at Cavo Bianco agrees with the order of 
names in Ptolemy, which is as follows: Cassiope 


* Scylax in Κασσωπαῖοι.--- Halon. 
Strabo, p. 234; Stephan. in 2 Ptolem. 1. 3, c. 14. 
Kasowrn.—Demosth. orat. de 


I. | EPIRUS. 95 


(Kassépo) ; Ptychia (Vido) ; Corcyra (Corft) ; 
Leucimne (Aléfkimo); Amphipagus (Cavo Bi- 
anco); Phalacrum (Cape Drasti, or the N.W. 
Cape). The only remarkable promontory in 
Corcyra, which seems here omitted, is that at the 
southern entrance of the Channel of Kassdpo. 

As we approach Vutzindré, the water becomes 
muddy, and in the bay is almost fresh. This bay 
is very shallow on the northern side, and the bar 
at the mouth of the river will even now, when the 
water is at the highest, but just admit of the entrance 
of καΐκια, or small coasting vessels. We row three or 
four miles up the river, through a plain once perhaps 
the property of Atticus, the friend of Cicero’, and 
now peopled with horses from the neighbouring 
villages. We then arrive at the Vivari*®, or more 
vulgarly Livari; that is to say, the principal 
fishery, which is on the left side of the river, at its 
exit from the lake, nearly opposite to the penin- 
sula which was anciently occupied by Buthrotum. 
The only buildings at the Livari are a ruined 
house of Venetian construction, and near it an old 
triangular castle, occupied by a dirty bilibash of 
the Vezir, and fifteen or twenty soldiers. The 
place is called Βουτζιντρὸν, vulgarly pronounced 
Vutjindro : the territory comprehends all the lake, 
and a part of the surrounding hills. In the house 
live the superintendent of the fishery and fourteen 
Greeks, who are employed by him. The fish are 
caught by means of a strong permanent dam, 
made of large beams, crowned with a palisading 


* Cicero ad Attic. 1. 4, ep. 8. 2 From vivarium. 


96 EPIRUS. | CHAP. 


of reeds. At intervals are small chambers in the 
dam, where the fish are taken in passing out of 
the lake. A man who is on the watch, gives a 
signal for shutting the door as soon as the chamber 
is full. There isa second dam above the first, for 
the purpose of breaking the force of the water, but 
the late violent rains have carried away great part 
of it, and injured the fishery for the remainder of 
the season, which usually lasts from September to 
March. The yearly average quantity of fish caught 
is 350,000 litres, or Greek pounds, which are the 
same as the Venetian. This year, though the 
season is only half over, they have caught 400,000. 
The fishery is farmed from the Vezir for fifty-five 
purses by N. Y. of Kalarytes, the bishop of loan- 
nina, and G. Z. of the Forty Saints. In the same 
farm is included the fishery of a smaller lake 
named Riza, to the south-eastward of the great 
lake; that of a lagoon called Armyr6é on the 
northern side of the mouth of the river, the pas- 
turage of the marshy land near the river and lake, 
and the privilege of cutting wood (but not con- 
struction timber) in the forests and marshes of the 
territory of Vutzindr6, as it was defined by treaty 
between Venice and the Turks. Beyond that line 
the wood-cutters pay for the privilege to Konispoli, 
which possesses all the south-eastern part of the 
fine plain, extending from the southern extremity 
of the lake to the foot of the hills which border the 
Channel of Corfa in face of the city. 

The right of fishing with nets in the lakes, 
lagoons, and river, is underlet by the farmers to 
Corfiotes, who employ many boats in this manner. 


II. | EPIRUS. 97 


The fish are salted on the spot, and the greater 
part sent to Corfa, which depends upon Vutzindro 
and the Gulf of Arta for its supply of fish during 
the long fasts of the Greek church; the rest are 
sold in the villages around for a great distance. 
From hence also (οὐ is chiefly furnished with 
firewood, and with staves to make casks for its oil 
and wine. These circumstances explain the 1m- 
portance which Venice always attached to the pos- 
session of Bucintro. The wood is chiefly procured 
on a mountain rising steeply from the eastern side 
of the lake and plain, and called Milia-vuni, from 
a little village near the summit, which is in sight 
from Corfu. The French are said to have formerly 
procured from thence some good timber for ship- 
building. Under its south-eastern extremity, be- 
tween it and another mountain, is the lake Riza, 
which is three or four miles long, and sends forth 
a stream which enters the lake of Vutzindrd, nearly 
opposite to the ruins of Buthrotum. Along the 
eastern side of the lake Riza passes the direct 
road from Deélvino to Mursia, a village at the 
southern extremity of the plain, from whence it 
continues to Konispoli and Filiates. The road from 
the Livari to Délvino follows the western side of 
the same lake, and joins the former road at the 
upper or northern extremity of the lake, near a 
source of salt water. On some low eminences 
rising from the southern bank of the lake Riza are 
the villages Zara and Zardpulo, which are com- 
prehended in the district of Vutzindréd. The 
fishery of this lake, as I before remarked, forms a 
part of the farm of the great livari, but is subject 
VOL. I. H 


98 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


to the payment of one hundred and eighty okes of 
fish to Selim Bey Koka, who owns the neighbour- 
ing land. 

Konispoli is a scattered town of four or five hun- 
dred Albanian families, conspicuous from Corfa 
by its situation on the summit of the maritime 
ridge, which stretches from the plain at the mouth 
of the Kalama, as far as the bay of Vutzindrd. 
Inland the plain extends southward from Vutzin- 
dré behind this ridge, for a distance of about five 
miles, and a river flows through it into the lake. 
The southern part of the plain belonged to a Hel- 
lenic city, of which remains are found on the 
edge of the plain, to the northward of Konispoli ; 
the other end was obviously a part of the territory 
of Buthrotum. 

About twenty days ago there was a battle at 
Konispoli, between the two parties which divide 
the town; at the head of one is Mahmiad Daliani, 
whose niece was married to Mukhtar Pasha some 
time ago, but divorced by him and then married 
to Selim Bey, of Délvino, who now resides at 
Konispoli. The other chief is Ismail Aga, a friend 
of the Vezir, whose assistance he demanded; but 
before it could arrive Ismail had made*up matters 
with his adversary. The Vezir’s party at Konis- 
poli and Filiates are called Jacobins’ by their 
opponents, in imitation of the party appellations 
of the Corfiotes. Aly was displeased with Ismail 
for not allowing time for his interference; but 
still hopes, by his means, to obtain possession 


s 
* Ἰακοβίκοι. 


IT. | EPIRUS. 99 


of Konispoli, which would be a great step to- 
wards his object of subjugating the whole of 
Tzamuria. 


Wild swine are very numerous among the 
thickets along the edge of the lake, particularly in 
the peninsula of Buthrotum; and the place is in- 
fested with jackalls, which at night make as hide- 
ous a noise as those in the plains of Palestine. 
Woodcocks are very numerous, and the lake is 
now covered with ducks. 

A Greek of Ioannina, who is employed at the 
Livari, had established, at the expence of six hun- 
dred piastres, a small shop and wine-store, which 
was totally carried away by the late inundations. 
Of the two years he has dwelt here, he has been 
ill the greater part of the last. In summer the air 
is extremely unhealthy ; and there is no drinking 
water, but that of the river, which in winter is ex- 
tremely turbid. 

As one of the states of Epirus, Buthrotum has 
not received any more notice from history than 
the cities of this province in general. It was oc- 
cupied by Cesar soon after he had taken Oricum’, 
and before the time of Strabo had become a Roman 
colony”. Virgil had a most imperfect idea of the 
place, when he applied to it the epithet of lofty ; 
and its resemblance to Troy is very like that of 
Monmouth to Macedon. It would be difficult 
even to find the dry torrent to which the followers 


+ Cesar de B.C..1. 3, c. 16. * Strabo, p. 324. 
H 2 


100 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


of Helenus had given the name of Xanthus'. The 
words which the Latin poet applies to the Phea- 
cian citadel are better chosen, and exactly describe 
the two rocky summits or κορυφαὶ, which have 
given its modern name to Corcyra ’. 

Strabo was so far acquainted with the site of 
Buthrotum, as to know that it stood on a cherso- 
nese; but in placing it at the mouth of the har- 
bour Pelodes, he was either greatly misinformed, 
or the word λιμένος has been improperly substituted 
in his text for Awvne*, and the name Pelodes be- 
longed to the lake as well as the harbour; for 
Ptolemy, Plutarch‘, and the word itself, sufh- 
ciently identify Pelodes with the muddy bay of 
Vutzindr6. Ptolemy, indeed, distinguishes be- 
tween the Bov@pwrov κόλπος and the Πηλώδης λιμήν 5 
placing the former next to Cape Posidium: pos- 


1 Protinus aerias Phaeacum abscondimus arces 

Litoraque Epiri legimus, portuque subimus 

Chaonio et celsam Buthroti ascendimus urbem. 

Ante urbem in luco, falsi Simoentis ad undam 
Libabat cineri Andromache manisque vocabat 
Hectoreum ad tumulum ror 

Procedo et parvam Trojam, simulataque magnis 
Pergama et arentem Xanthi cognomine rivum 
Agnosco, Scaezeque amplector limina porte. 

Virgil. Ain. 1. 3, v. 291, 302, 348. 


? στοὺς ἹΚορφούς. ρογνησίζοντι, ἐποίκους ἔχων Ῥω- 
3. Μετὰ δὲ "Ογχησμον,Ποσεί- pratovc.—Strabo, p. 824. 
διον καὶ Βουθρωτὸν, ἐπὶ τῷ στό- * Ptolem. 1. ὃ, ὁ. ee 


ματι τοῦ καλουμένου Τηλώδους Plutarch. de defect. Orac. 


λιμένος, ἱδρυμένον ἐν τόπῳ χερ- 


II. | EPIRUS. 101 


sibly port Pelodes was the modern Armyré, which 
may have been converted in process of time by the 
deposit of the river, from a well-sheltered harbour 
into a lagoon on the northern side of the river’s 
mouth. The ruins of Buthrotum occupy a penin- 
sula which is bounded on the western side by a 
small bay in the lake, and is surrounded from the 
north to the south-east by the windings of the 
river just above its issue. The walls of the Roman 
colony still exist in the whole circumference, which 
is about a mile, and are mixed with remains both 
of later and of Hellenic work, showing that 
the city always occupied the same site. Within 
the inclosure are the ruins of a large church, of 
two or three small ones, and of some cisterns, 
baths, and houses. There are also some frag- 
ments of granite columns and of other marbles. 
The towers which flank the walls 

were built with a salient angle, 

and some of them were of this ἥ J 
form. The citadel was towards 

the bay of the lake, where the side of the penin- 
sula is the highest and steepest. Of the Hellenic 
remains there is a very perfect piece of wall on the 
south-eastern side, which, as it consists of regular 
courses, is probably not much older than the time 
of Pyrrhus. There is also a fine remnant on the 
western side, of which the courses are nearly equal 
and parallel, and appear entirely so at a distance ; 
but on a nearer inspection, few of the stones are 
found to be quadrangular, nor the courses regular. 
Immediately opposite to the house of the fishery 


102 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


are some other ruins which appear to be Venetian; 
among them is a tower resembling those on the 
coast of Malta. There is a similar one in the pass 
behind the Liméni of the Forty Saints. 

Jan. 15.—A rocky summit on the western side 
of the ruins commands a fine view of the Epirote 
coast, from the cape near Palasa to the islands of 
Syvota, as well as of all the eastern side of Corfa. 
The plain of Délvino is seen beyond the lake, 
together with the surrounding mountains. On 
the narrow ridge which separates the lake from 
the bay of Examili, stands the monastery of St. 
George, surrounded with gardens, olive-grounds, 
and vineyards; it is now occupied by Aly as a 
military post. A little beyond the southern point 
of the bay of Vutzindro is a small port called 
Glyfa, a little within Cape Stilo: then occurs the 
harbour of Ftelia, or Aftelia, which is well shel- 
tered, and though small is a good anchorage for 
ships of commerce; then Kataitd, a little open 
port, then Bagania, a good harbour for merchant 
ships. Beyond Bagania, the villages, Konispoli, 
Lidpesi, and Saiadha’, crown the hills which 
border the coast. Under Saiadha is a sandy 
shallow bay, exposed to the north-west, in which 
is a skala called Kerasia, which is the ordinary 
landing-place from Corfa on the way to Filiates 
and loannina, and from whence the island is usu- 
ally supplied with cattle, sheep, hogs, and other 
provision. 


* Koviaroduc, Δόπεσι, Σαγιάδα. 


11. | EPIRUS. 103 


At the mouth of the river Kalama, the ancient 
Thyamis, there is an island or peninsula affording 
good shelter, immediately beyond which is the bay 
of Gomenitza, a fine harbour for ships of any size 
and number ; the entrance is narrowed by the shoals 
formed by the Kalama, which extend from Kerasia 
all the way round to the bay of Gomenitza. Close 
to the mouth of the river, on the north, is the in- 
sulated mountain called Mavronéro, which seems 
once to have been an island, as all around it are 
low sandy points. It seems to be the projection 
which Ptolemy entitules the promontory or pro- 
montories of Thyamis’; the low promontories 
around it would justify the plural number. Five 
or six miles to the southward of Gomenitza are the 
islands Sybota, which still bear the ancient name’. 
They shelter a small bay, where on the shore of 
the main land stands a village of Musulman Alba- 
nians named Vrakhana or Murto. Strabo has not 
noticed any place between Buthrotum and Sybota: 
an unfortunate omission, as there must have been 
anciently some important towns in the rich districts 
near the mouth of the Thyamis, concerning which 
no author has left us any precise information. 
Torone would seem from Ptolemy to have stood in 
one of the bays between the mouth of the Kalama 
and Syvota. 

The country which lies to the southward of the 


* Πηλώδης λιμὴν, Θυάμεως ἄκρα, Θυάμιος ποταμοῦ ἐκβολαὶ, 
Τορώνη, Σύβοτα Ayujv.—Ptolemy, 1. 8, c. 14. 
2 Τὰ Σύβοτα. 


- 


12 


104 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


districts of Vutzindré and Délvino, as far as the 
Kalama, is called Parakalamo. Φιλάτες, pronounced 
Filiates by the Albanians, is the principal town of 
Parakalamo. With the exception of a few Christian 
artisans and shopkeepers, it is entirely inhabited 
by Musulman Albanians, contains several hand- 
some mosques, and about 2000 houses, which, as 
in the generality of Albanian towns, are dispersed 
over a great space; the ground is hilly, and the 
place is situated at a distance of some miles from 
the plain of the Kalama. Ibrahim Demis and 
Ibrahim Stambulis are the two principal chieftains, 
and can bring two or three thousand armed Musul- 
mans into the field. 

Plessaritza is a large Greek village on a rocky 
hill to the northward of Filiates, and situated above 
the western side of a valley which forms the natural 
communication between the vale of the Kalama 
and that of Délvino. Beyond Plessaritza, towards 
Délvino, are Kétzika and Verva, in the narrowest 
part of the valley abovementioned : this pass, and 
that of Neokhori, in the mountains which separate 
the valley of the lower Kalama from the districts 
of Paramythia and Margariti, are the only two en- 
trances into that valley on the land side, except 
the difficult route which leads into it along the 
river from the north-eastward. Hence Parakalamo, 
Daghi, to the south of the Kalama, Magariti, and 
Paramythia, have hitherto remained independent 
of Aly Pasha. 

Jan. 16.—Return this morning to Corfa, in a 
boat of that island with a gentle scirocco. At two 


11. | EPIRUS. 105 


thirds of the distance down the river stands a house 
built by a Corfiote, who owns also part of the plain; 
but his speculation having failed, the house is now 
in ruins. Aly Pasha having already made so much 
progress in gaining possession of the Ex-Venetian 
places, is desirous of purchasing this property from 
the Corfiote. 


CHAPTER III. 


SECOND JOURNEY. 


ZETOLIA. 


Landing at Vardssova—Galata—River Evenus— Bokhori— 
Calydon, Chalcis, Taphiassus, Macynia—Mesolénghi—Pleu- 
ron, Proschium, Pylene—Khierasovo—Mount Zygoés, Ara- 
cynthus—Ston-gambo—Vrakhéri—Chorography of Karlili— 
Kuvelo— Vlokhé — Thermus— Mount Panetolicum— River 
Ermitza — Zapandi— River Aspro, Achelous — Stratus —Le- 
penu—Capture of Thermus by Philip son of Demetrius—Me- 
tapa, Conope, Lysimachia, Olenus, lake Hyria, Acre, Tricho- 
nium, Phyteum, Agrinium, Thestia. 


June 12, 1805.—At 11 p.m. 1 embarked with 
two servants and a Tatar courier in a boat of 
Kefalonia from the Skala of Patra for the oppo- 
site coast; but a light breeze, blowing directly 
against us from the lagoon of Mesolonghi, and 
our boat being furnished only with two oars, it 
was not until the morning of June 13, at 8.30, 
that I landed at the ruin of a tower of Venetian, 
or lower Greek construction, at the foot of Mount 
Varassova, as that immense pile of rock is here 
called which closes the plain of the Hvenus to the 


CHAP. III. | ETOLIA. 107 


eastward, but which is more commonly known 
at Patra by the name of Mount Galata, from a 
village of that name. The other steep mountain 
or promontory towards 'Epakto, which at Patra is 
generally called Paleo-vuni, is here better known 
by the name of Kaki-skala. The landing-place of 
Varassova is in an angle, where the level coast at 
the mouth of the Avenus terminates, under the 
cliffs of the mountain, which rise almost perpen- 
dicularly to the summit. Several copious streams 
of the purest water issue from the foot of the 
mountain, and form a pond and marsh near the 
beach, from which a stream flows into the sea. 
Most of these fountains are within fifty yards of the 
beach; and there is one which rises in the sea itself 
ten or twelve feet from the shore, forcing its way 
to the surface, and making the water all around it 
fresh. From these sources the place receives the 
name of Krio-ner6. 

Some return mules, which have brought hither 
plank from the interior mountains to be trans- 
ported to Zakytho, afford the means of forwarding 
my baggage to Galata. At noon I leave the sea- 
beach on foot, but soon meet some horses, sent 
from the village by order of Osman Bey, a Turk 
ot ‘Epakto, who owns Galata. The plain is very 
marshy near the sea, but farther inland is fertile ; 
and near Galata and Bokhori produces maize, 
corn, oil, wine, silk, and rice. Of the latter grain 
a great quantity might be grown, as there are 
large uncultivated tracts in the plain well adapted 
to it. Two or three miles to the northward of 


108 ATOLIA. [CHAP. 


Galata and Bokhori, the valley of the Evenus, 
now called Fidhari, branches from the maritime 
plain. It is inclosed by hills clothed with oaks, 
and has a rich and beautiful appearance. , 

Galata is a Turkish village of thirty houses, 
distant 24 miles north, 60 west, from Krio-neré ; it 
is situated in the midst of olive plantations and 
cornfields, and though surrounded also by rice 
marshes, is said to be not unhealthy. The pea- 
sants are now employed in reaping barley. The 
Turk who brought the horses conducts me to his 
cottage, provides a dinner, and accompanies me 
in the afternoon to Mesolonghi. We are pre- 
vented from setting out till 4.53, by a heavy rain, 
accompanied with thunder, an occurrence almost 
daily in the mountainous parts of Greece in the 
early summer. The clouds begin to collect on 
the mountains about 9 o'clock, and the storm is 
generally over by 3 or 4 p.m., but sometimes it is 
later. Though it happened every day during the 
fortnight I remained at Patra, the rain never 
reached that place. While travelling in the Mo- 
réa, 1 remarked that these meridian storms were 
more constant in the mountains of Rumili than in 
the Peninsula. At 5.15 we cross the Fidhari 
about the same place where the centaur Nessus, 
of old, transported passengers across the river in 
his arms, and where he suffered from the arrows 
of Hercules for his rudeness to Deianira, for here- 
abouts is naturally the most convenient passage. 
Nessus would seem to have been no more than 
a mortal horseman, who gained a few pence 


111. | ETOLIA. 109 


by his employment’. The river well illustrates 
the story, as it requires a guide for the ford even 
in this season, the water reaching to the stirrups. 
The water is clear and rapid, running over a 
wide gravelly bed, which in winter is often en- 
tirely covered. The river separates the district 
of ‘Epakto from that of Zygos. 

Having reached the right bank, we pass through 
Bokhori’, a Greek village situated amidst plane- 
trees, cornfields, fruit-gardens, and plantations of 
the same productions which grow near Galata. 
Derivations from the Evenus here turn several mills. 
At the hamlet of Kurt-aga, near the point where 
the last slope of the mountain on the north-western 
side of the vale of the Hvenus advances into the 
plain of Bokhori, are foundations of the walls of a 
large Hellenic polis, not far from the right bank of 
the river. The position corresponds so exactly to 
that of Calydon, as indicated by Pliny’, that one 
can hardly doubt of the identity. Without this 
testimony, there might have been some doubts on 
the question. Strabo, by his citation of two con- 
flicting authorities, without deciding between them, 
clearly shows that he never was here; but though 
his text, as it now stands, is unintelligible, it re- 
quires only the transposition of two of the para- 


1 Ὃς τὸν βαθύῤῥουν ποταμὸν Evnvoy βροτοὺς 
Μισθοῦ ’ropeve yepoiv.—Sophocl. Trachin. v. 559. 
Apollod. 1.2. ¢.7. Pausan. Phocie. c. 38. 
* Calydon est septem millibus quingentis passibus a mari 
juxta Evenum amnem.—Plin. H.N. 1. 4, c. 2. 


110 ZETOLIA. [CHAP. 


graphs’, and the addition of the single word ovx’, to 
be made perfectly applicable. The passage occurs 
in a description of the maritime places in their 
proper order from Leucas to Antirrhium. With the 
proposed alteration his remarks will be as follows: 
‘¢ Next to the lake Cynia, which has a communi- 
cation with the sea, is Pleuron, then the town 
Licyrna, above which, thirty stades inland is Caly- 
don, and near it the temple of Apollo Laphreeus ; 
then the Evenus, to which, from Actium, there is 
a distance of 670 stades, and beyond it the moun- 
tain Chalcis, which Artemidorus calls Chalcia ; 
then the mountain Taphiassus ; then the city Ma- 
cynia; then Molycreia, and near it Antirrhium, 
the boundary of A‘tolia and Locris, to which, from 
the Evenus, there is a distance of 120 stades. 
Artemidorus, however, differs respecting the moun- 
tain Chalcis, or Chalcia, placing it between the 
Achelous and Pleuron. Apollodorus, on the other 
hand, places both Chalcis and Taphiassus, as | 
before stated, above Molycreia, and Calydon be- 
tween Pleuron and Chalcis, unless, indeed, we 


1 The text now stands as 
The figures 1 2, de- 
scribe the proposed order. 


μεσογαΐᾳ σταδίοις τριάκοντα" 


follows. περὶ δὲ τὴν Καλυδῶνα ἐστὶ τὸ 


τοῦ Λαφραίον᾽ Δπόλλωνος ἱερόν. 


2. Ei’ ὁ Ἑὔηνος, εἰς ὃν ἀπὸ 
τοῦ ᾿Ακτίου στάδιοι ἑξακόσιοι 
ἑβδομήκοντα" μετὰ δὲ τὸν Envoy 
τὸ ὄρος ἡ Χαλκὶς ἣν Χαλκίαν 
1. Ei@’ 


ἡ Πλευρὼν, εἶθ᾽ ἡ Δίκυρνα κώμη 


εἴρηκεν ᾿Αρτεμίδωρος. 


ἧς ὑπέρκειται Καλυδὼν ἐν τῇ 


—Strabo, p. 459. 

* ᾿Αρτεμίδωρος μὲν (οὐχ) οὕτω 
περὶ τῆς εἴτε Χαλκίδος, ὅτο. 
p- 450.—M. Coray has al- 
ready proposed this addition: 
see Géographie de Strabon, 
tome iv. p. 64. 


pai fie JETOLIA. 111 


suppose that Mount Chalcia near Pleuron was dif- 
ferent from Chalcis near Molycreia.” 

As it cannot be doubted that the Chalcis and Ta- 
phiassus here named were the two great mountains 
situated between the river Fidhari and the Castle 
of Rumili, or ancient Antirrhium, it follows that 
Chalcis was Varassova, or the western mountain, 
and Taphiassus the eastern, now called Kaki-skala. 
And as there is no appearance of an ancient site 
between the river and Mount Varassova, we may 
infer that Chalcis or Hypochalcis’, the Χαλκὶς 
ἀγχίαλος Of Homer’, and the Chalceia of Polybius’, 
stood in the valley between the two mountains, 
where is now a harbour called Gavrolimni. It 
would seem also, that the site of Macynia was be- 
tween Taphiassus and Molycreia, which last, as I 
have already remarked *, was on the first rise of the 
hills behind the castle of Rumili. I was informed 
at Patra, from whence the whole of this coast is 
well seen, that there are still some remains of a 
Hellenic fortress, now called Ovrié-kastro, between 
the mountains, and some vestiges also on the 
eastern side of Kaki-skala both of them confirming 
the preceding conjecture, the former being the 
remains of Chalcis, the latter of Macynia. Ptolemy 
places Molycreia in Locris®, but Strabo makes An- 
tirrhium the boundary, and ascribes Molycreia to 
/Etolia. 

The modern name Μποχώρι is obviously a cor- 


* Strabo, p. 451, Stephan. * Travels in the Morea, vol. 
in Χαλκὶς, Ὑποχαλκίς. 2. p. 150. 
? Tl. B. v. 639. > Ptolem. 1. 3, ο. 15. 


ὁ Polyb. I. 5, c. 94. 


112 ATOLIA. [CHAP. 


ruption of Ὑποχώριον in allusion to its position, that 
is to say, an outlying quarter of Calydon below the 
city. In some vineyards near Kurtaga a sepulchral 
stele has lately been found and brought to Bokhori. 
It has that common form which is an imitation of 
the end of a sarcophagus, and is inscribed with the 
names ‘ Philumena, Antimachus’,’ where the prece- 
dence of the lady’s name without anything to indi- 
cate the relationship between the two is uncommon. 

The evening is unfortunately too near its close 
to allow me to examine the ruins of Calydon. 
Proceeding therefore from Bokhori we pass through 
fields.of oats, barley, grinia’, guinea corn, and 


* See Inscription No. I. at 
the end of this volume. 

2 Τηρηνιὰς, or Τρηνιὰς, is 
wheat of a middle hardness, 
and generally with a black 
beard and fine full grain; in 
the Moréa it is chiefly pro- 
duced on the banks of the I- 
pheius. The other species cul- 
tivated in Greece are, 2. Βλαχό- 
orapt, brought from ‘Trieste 
many years ago, in a time of 
scarcity, and planted in the 
Moréa. It is a soft corn, and 
being a native of a colder cli- 
mate, is grown chiefly on the 
high lands. 3. Σιδινέτζα, a 
small yellow grain and hardish. 
It grows principally in the lower 
parts of Achaia, eastward of 
Patra. 4. Ατζαλό-σταρι, very 
hard; grows in Beotia. The 
following is a rough calculation 


by our consul at Patra of the 
produce of wheatin an average 
year, in the principal corn dis- 
tricts of the southern part of 


Greece. 
Κοιλὰ Πολιτικὰ, 


or Kila of Constantinople, reck- 
oned to contain an average of 
22 okes of 2310. 


Thebes: i... GG 150,000 
Livadhia.< .4 ibe 200,000 
Salona «~<a 50,000 
Corinth and Achaia 100,000 
Arkadlita., sei cee 50,000 


Pyrgo and Gastani.. 150,000 
Great part of the lat- 
ter is from. the 
champaign country 
on the banks of the 
Alpheus as far up 
as Londari. 
Total 700,000 
Kilé of Constantinople. 


IIT. | ETOLIA. 113 


maize, and at 6.20 leave on the left a village which 
has recently been built in the level near the sea, on 
the edge of the eastern extremity of the Lagoon of 
Mesolénghi, and hence called Neokhori. The 
mountains on the right are well cultivated at the 
foot, and above are covered with trees. Having 
descended upon the lowest level at something more 
than a mile from the edge of the lagoon, we pro- 
ceed over a desert space inundated by the late 
rains ; at 7.10 enter a suburb of Mesolonghi con- 
sisting of thatched huts, and at 7.25 arrive at the 
house of a merchant on the seaside. 

Mesolénghi’ was evidently so named from its 
situation in the midst of the λόγγος, or wilderness 
of woods and marshes, which, under the Romans, 
gradually enveloped all the ruined cities of mari- 
time /Etolia, until the position, like that of Venice, 
was chosen for its security during the middle ages, 
to which period of Greek literature the name be- 
longs. The town contains about 1000 families, 
residing in houses which indicate a great variety 
of conditions, and occupy a large space, as well 
along the shore of the lagoon as in the adjacent 
marshy level. ‘The lagoon is separated from the 
sea by a narrow ῥάμμα, as it is called, or thread of 
low land, and is divided into two nearly equal parts 
by, a projection from the marshy level, which ad- 
vances to within a short distance of the ramma. 
In the eastern division of the lagoon, and in 
the middle of a bay at its northern extremity, is 
the town of Anatoliko, entirely covering a small 


* Μεσολόγγιον. 
Yor, I. Ι 


114 ATOLIA. [CHAP. 


island. The entrance from the roadsted of Meso- 
lénghi into the lagoon is at a distance of four miles 
from the town, where is a small island called Vasi- 
ladhi, and upon it a fort and custom-house. Large 
boats cannot approach within a mile of the houses, 
nor can they advance so far unless when empty: all 
the remaining navigation of the lagoon, therefore, 
is carried on by shallow monoxyla, or canoes, which 
are made of hollow trunks of oaks from the neigh- 
bouring mountains. In the town, salt water rises 
every where on digging to the depth of three or 
four feet; but so near as the gardens which sur- 
round the town, wells of a greater depth furnish an 
abundance of fresh water which maintains the gar- 
dens in perpetual verdure. The water for drinking 
is brought by an aqueduct from Mount Zygos be- 
tween the foot of which and the gardens there is a 
plain covered with currant plantations, vineyards, 
and fields of corn, but which do not supply the 
place with more than a four months’ consumption 
of bread. 

I was surprised to hear that the air of Meso- 
lénghi is not considered unhealthy, and to observe 
that the appearance of the people, who are a hand- 
some race, corresponds to this opinion. It is ad- 
mitted, however, that the back part of the town 
is not so healthy as the seaside, where the best 
houses are situated. The fishery of the lagoon, 
and the commerce of this the only emporium in 
fKtolia, are the productive labors of the Meso- 
_longhites. The fish are taken in a variety of 
modes, but in the greatest numbers by means of a 
palisading near the stomata or mouths of the lagoon, 


III. | ATOLIA. 115 


of which there are several communicating with the 
sea. Here, after breeding in the shallows, they 
are intercepted on their return to the sea, in pas- 
sages or in chambers into which the passages con- 
duct. Each kind of fish has a different season 
during the summer and autumn for going out. 
Besides the quantity consumed in the town, or in 
the villages around, either fresh, half salted, or 
thoroughly salted, 200,000 litres are exported 
every year. The other exports of Mesolonghi are 
5000 barrels of oil every two years, 1500 barrels 
of wine, 300,000 litres of currants, 1000 okes of 
silk, and all the surplus corn of the southern parts 
of Karlili. The merchant, in whose house I am 
lodged, carried last year a cargo of maize to Tunis. 
The currants, shipped here, are partly produced 
in the plain of Vrakhori, and as they form part of 
the cargoes of the British ships trading to Patra, a 
consul or agent has been appointed at Mesoldénghi, 
who is the son of a Kefalonite merchant residing 
here, and who acts also for the Septinsular Re- 
public. 

June 14.—A ride of a little more than one hour 
from Mesoloénghi conducts me to some ruins in a 
lofty situation on Mount Zygés, just as the usual 
post-meridian storm of rain and thunder is coming 
on. Fortunately it lasts only half an hour. The 
remains which are now known by the name of τὸ 
Κάστρον τῆς Κυρίας Εἰρήνης, or the Castle of Lady 
Irene, are those of the entire circuit of the ruined 
walls of a small polis, about a mile in circumference, 
enclosing the western face of averysteep and rugged 
height, the summit of which formed an acropolis. 

VOL. I. EZ φ- 


116 ATOLIA. [CHAP, 


The masonry 1s generally of the third order. The 
lower courses of the principal gate exist, on one side 
of which is a stone measuring seven feet by four. 
It seems to have been a common practice among 
the Greeks to place the largest masses near the 
principal entrance, to excite respect in a stranger 
for the fortifications. In the centre of the wall, 
which defended the lower side of the town, is a 
square tower, and at one extremity of the same wall 
another tower, having very long flanks. The most 
remarkable remains within the enclosure are a 
theatre about 100 feet in diameter, and above it, 
on the side of the hill, a cistern, 100 feet long, 70 
broad, and 14 deep, excavated on three sides in ᾿ 
the rock, and on the fourth constructed of ma- 
sonry. ‘The excavation is on a slope, and between 
the excavated side at the upper end, and a wall 
which closes the lower, there are four other paral- 
lel, though not equidistant walls reaching from the 
one side of the excavation to the other, and con- 
sisting of courses of regular masonry, of a single 
stone in thickness, and which have openings at the 
bottom in the form of a triangle, very acute at the 
upper angle. The intention of these walls and 
openings in such an excavation it 15 not very easy 
to explain. Close to a small side-gate on the north 
are the foundations of a building, and to the east- 
ward the remains of two parallel walls, enclosing 
a terrace twenty-four yards long and eleven wide ; 
near the great gate are those of a small quad- 
rangular building, like the cell of a temple, the 
stones square and accurately cut, but without any 
appearance of a peristyle or any fragments of 


111. | ETOLIA. 117 


columns. In the Acropolis are some remains of 
Doric shafts of white marble, about three feet in 
diameter ; they belonged, perhaps, to the identical 
temple of Minerva at Pleuron, noticed by Dicear- 
chus', for I have little doubt that these are the 
ruins of Pleuron. Strabo remarks, that the more 
ancient Pleuron was destroyed by Demetrins II. 
son of Antigonus Gonatas’; that it stood in the 
plain towards Calydon, and that the Pleuronii 
afterwards built a new town on Mount Aracynthus. 
From his description also of the Evenus, though 
he was mistaken in supposing the course of that 
river above Calydon to have been easterly, it is 
evident that the territory of Pleuron bordered upon 
the Calydonia*. Diczarchus, in naming Pleuron 
between the Achelous and Calydon, agrees with 


ty. + +) ποταμὸν δ᾽ ἡ χώρα ἔχει 
“AXEAWOY . + ., ., 

yo. fF, exerat 0 ΑἰΤωλία, 
Ἔν ἢ πόλις ὑπόκειται Πλευρὼν καὶ ἱερὸν 


ἽΑγιον ᾿Αθηνᾶς ἐστὶν ὠνομασμένον. 


"Ἔπειτα Καλυδὼν, 


5 About the year 235, B.c. 
It appears from Strabo, that 
this Demetrius was commonly 
known by the surname of AXto- 
licus, to distinguish him from 
the Poliorcetes: both the De- 
metrii having been sons of An- 
tigoni. 


ἂμ . ἡ Αἰτωλία. 


Eyec.. .. 
. τὸν ᾿Αράκυγθον, περὶ ὃν 
Ἁ ΄ὔ ~ J 

τὴν νεωτέραν ἸΪλευρῶνα συνῷ- 
κισαν, αφέντες τὴν παλαιὰν 
> \ ~ 
ἐγγὺς Καλυδῶνος 


et ΓΝ. 7 3 
Ol Οἰκῆτορες, εὔκαρπον οὖσαν 


κειμένην 


.— Diceearch. v. 55. 


καὶ πεδιάδα, πορθοῦντος τὴν 
/ / ~ ? 

χώραν Δημήτριου τοῦ ἐπικλη- 
Gevroc . AirwALKov . . + w 0s 
Ὃ δὲ Evnvcg ... ~~.» pet ov 
dua τῆς Κουρητικῆς κατ᾽ doxac, 
e/ > \ ς 9 \ μον / 
ἥτις ἐστὶν ἡ αὑτὴ τῇ ΠΠλευρωνίᾳ, 
ἀλλὰ διὰ τῆς πρὸς ἕω μᾶλλον 
παρὰ τὴν Χαλκίδα καὶ Καλυ- 
δῶνα" εἶτα ἀνακάμψας ἐπὶ τὰ 
τῆς Πλευρῶνος πεδία τῆς πα- 
λαιᾶς, καὶ παραλλάξας εἰς δύσιν, 
᾽ ΄ \ \ ? ‘ 
ἐπιστρέφει πρὸς τὰς ἐκβολὰς 
καὶ τὴν μεσημβρίαν.---δίγαῦο, 
p. 451. 


118 ATOLIA. [CHAP. 


Apollodorus, who places Calydon between Pleuron 
and Chalcis'. If the situations therefore which 1 
have assigned to Calydon and Chalcis be correct, 
there can be no question that Pleuron was near 
Mesolonghi. In farther admitting the transpo- 
sition which 1 have proposed in the text of Strabo, 
we may add to the preceding testimonies that of 
Artemidorus. Nor is the concurrence of Thucy- 
dides wanting, who, in describing the march of 
Eurylochus the Spartan from Locris into Atolia, 
in the sixth autumn of the Peloponnesian war, re- 
lates, that he moved from Molycrium to Calydon, 
Pleuron, and Proschium, in which places he re- 
mained until he proceeded against Amphilochia ’. 

There is every reason to believe that Mount Zygos, 
upon a part of which the castle of Irene stands, is 
the ancient Aracynthus, and the ruins accord with 
those of the later Plewron, inasmuch as they have 
no appearance of remote antiquity, and are exactly 
those of such a small town as we may suppose Vew 
Pleuron to have been from the circumstances of the 
people at the time of its foundation. I remarked, 
moreover, some pieces of Hellenic wall at the foot of 
the mountain on the edge of the plain of Mesolén- 
ghi, as well as on a small height in that plain now 
called Ghyft6-kastro, situated precisely where the 
words of Strabo would lead one to look for Old 
Pleuron. The name Ghyfto-kastro allows the 
conjecture, that greater remains once existed there, 
and that the materials have been removed for the 
use of modern constructions at Mesolonghi. 


| Ap. Strabon. p. 460, v. ~ *? Thueyd. 1.3, c, 102. 
sup. p. 110, 


111. | ETOLIA. 119 


Proschium, from a comparison of Strabo with 
Thucydides, in the places just referred to, seems to 
have occupied the western part of the ridge of 
Zygos, and to have possessed the plain, at its foot, 
now belonging to Anatoliko. The high situation 
in which Proschium was founded when the low 
position of the Homeric Pylene was abandoned ’, 
seems to accord with that of the monastery of St. 
George in Mount Zygés, between Anatoliké and 
Anghelékastro, where considerable remains of a 
Hellenic city are said to exist. Pylene may have 
received its name from the remarkable cleft called 
the Klisaira, which extends through the whole 
breadth of Mount Zygos, and which was exactly 
such a place as the ancient Greeks called a πύλη, 
or gate. In this case it is probable that Pylene 
was situated at the maritime end of the Klisira, 
over against Anatoliko. 

Apokuro, a sub-district of the Turkish kaza 
of Karpenisi, to the north-eastward of Zyg%s, 
seems evidently to have derived its name from 
Mount Curium and the Curetes; for it compre- 
hends nearly the same country in which Homer 
places that people, as well as Strabo, who says 
that Pleuron was situated below the mountain 
Curium ”, whence it seems that Curium and Ara- 


* Αἰολεῖς . . . « THY T)evpwriove Κουρῆτας dévopac- 
Strabo, 
ἀνώτερον τόπους ἤλλαξαν αὐτῆς =p. 451. οἱ δ᾽ ἀπὸ τοῦ ὄρους 





Πυλήνην μετενέγκαντες εἰς τοὺς θῆναί τινες ὑπέλαβον. 


καὶ τοὔνομα, Πρόσχιον καλέσαν- τοῦ Κυρίου, τοῦ ὑπερκειμένου 
Tec.—Strabo, p. 451. τῆς Τ]λευρῶνος.---». 465. But 

* Il. I. v. 525, et seq. some preferred a heroic deriva- 
- Κούριον δὲ τῆς παλαιᾶς tion both for Curetes and Acar- 
Πλευρῶνος πλησίον, dd’ ov rove _ nanes. 


120 ATOLIA. [CHAP. 


cynthus were the same, or different parts of the 
same, mountain. . 

Having descended the hill of Kyria Irimi on 
foot, through the rocks and shrubs with which it 
is entirely covered, we regain, in half an hour, 
the direct road from Mesolénghi to Khierasovo, at 
a distance of three quarters of an hour from the 
former ; and soon after having entered the moun- 
tain, and lost sight of the maritime country, leave 
on the right, at 5.20, a tumulus, covered with stones, 
situated in a little valley, along which a torrent 
flows ; on its opposite bank is a Hellenic founda- 
tion. These are possibly the sepulchre and shrine 
of one of the ancient heroes of tolia. After 
ascending for an hour over a rugged road, we 
arrive on the side of a stream shaded by large 
plane-trees : follow a path still worse than before 
along the side of the same torrent through a forest 
of planes, oaks, and pirnaria, as far as a hollow 
between two summits of Mount Zygos; and at the 
end of another hour reach a height which com- 
mands a view of the lakes of Vrakhori, and of the 
great mountain to the north-east of that town, 
called Kyria Evghénia’ (Lady Eugenia), or vul- 
garly Mount Viéna. Descending from hence, 
through a forest for three quarters of an hour, we 
arrive, at 8.30, at the village of Khierasovo’, 
beautifully dispersed among vineyards and gar- 
dens on the slope of the mountain, in the midst of 
a forest of chestnuts. The gathering of the nuts 
and the carrying of them to Anatoliko and Meso- 


* Kupia Ebyéveca. 2 Χιεράσοβος. 


IIL. | TOLIA. 121 


lénghi, from whence most of them are transported 
to Zakytho or the other islands, together with the 
tending of their sheep and goats on the mountain, 
form the principal employments of the people of 
Khierasovo. 

June 15.—A descent of fifty minutes from Khie- 
rasovo through the forest of chestnuts, conducts 
us, at 7.5, nearly to the base of the mountain, 
where a torrent shaded by planes turns some mills, 
and flows down a valley opening into the plain of 
Vrakhéri. At 7.40, just at the entrance of the 
plain, we pass a zevgalati’, or hamlet, dependent 
on Khierdsovo, and called Ston Gambo’, or ‘ at 
the plain ;” but which is sufficiently high to com- 
mand a view over a great part of the extensive 
plains and lakes around Vrakhori, with the oppo- 
site mountains. This prospect is alone sufficient to 
identify Mount Zygos with Aracynthus ; since, ac- 
cording to Dionysius the geographer, Mount Aracyn- 
thus bounded to the southward the great plain of 
the AStolians*. There are three lakes in this plain, 
one to the right of the river Aspro, or Achelous, 
the two others to the left of it; but the latter are 
separated only by a marshy and often inundated 
tract, full of large trees and underwood, through 
which is a causeway of stone, forming the only 
road from Vrakhori to Anatoliké6, Mesolénghi, 
Bokhori, and the adjacent coast, whether by Khie- 


1 ζευγαλάτι, Cevyadaria, ᾿ 2 στὸν κάμπον. 


ζευγαλατιά. 
ὅ Τῆς δ᾽ ὑπὲρ ἐς νότον εἶσιν ὑπὸ σκοπιὴν ᾿Αρακύνθου 
᾿Ανδρῶν Αἰτωλῶν πεδίον μέγα. 


Dionys. Perieg. v. 431. 


122 ATOLIA. [CHAP. 


rasoyo or by Klistra. The latter route, after 
having crossed the causeway, turns to the right 
of the former, and passes by Papadhates, which 
stands on an extremity of Mount Zygos, not far 
from the borders of the middle lake; it then 
enters the pass of Klistra, which natural open- 
ing, by avoiding the ascent and descent of the 
mountain, is often preferred as the road from 
Vrakhori to Mesolonghi, although circuitous. 
Above Papadhates are considerable remains of a 
Hellenic city, probably Lysimachia. Leaving Pa- 
padhates a few miles on the left, we enter on 
the causeway at 8.10, and ride through a most 
agreeable shade of oaks, wild olives, and planes, 
festooned with wild vines, and intermixed in the 
more marshy parts with large reeds. The cause- 
way, which rests on a great number of arches, is 
said to be two hundred years old, and to have 
been built by a certain bey of Vrakhori, who 
probably took advantage of the foundations of a 
more ancient work. A gentle stream flows through 
the arches from right to left. We arrive at the 
end of the causeway at 8.30, cross the remainder 
of the plain, and, ascending the last slope of the 
heights which border it on the north, arrive at 
9.45 at Vrakhori. 

This town occupies a large space of ground, and 
contains about 500 Turkish, 100 Greek, and 40 
Jewish families. It was entirely Turkish not 
many years ago, but the present Aga has en- 
couraged the Greeks to reside. The Turkish 
houses have large gardens attached to them, with 
high stone walls to hide the windows of the 
harém, and they are built in a more antique 


111. | TOLIA. 123 


Turkish taste than is commonly seen in Greece. 
The Greek houses are small, and situated in the 
_ lower part. of the town. In the afternoon I visit 
Yustf Aga, the Musellim of Karlili, of which 
district Vrakhori is the chief town. Yusuf, who 
has resided here during the last seven years, with 
the exception of one, owes his promotion to his 
cousin of the same name, who is the powerful 
Validé Kiayassy, and, like his relative, a native of 
Khania in Crete'. In consequence of the Musel- 
lim’s interest at court, Aly Pasha finds it necessary 
to treat him with respect ; received him lately with 
great distinction at Vicopolis, and affects to place 
his Dervéni troops under Yusaf’s orders, which 
is believed by many to be nothing less than a 
trap laid by the crafty Albanian to bring Yusif 
into disgrace ; for not long ago, a hasné’, which 
the latter had forwarded from Kravari with 40 
soldiers, in its way to Constantinople was at- 
tacked by the robbers at Makrinoro, which is 
not very likely to have happened without the 
Pasha’s connivance. 

The royal farms of the revenue in this part of 
Greece are divided as follows: Karlili, Meso- 
longhi, ‘Epacto, Kravari, Badrajik, (Nedpatra), 
and Karpenisi. Aly Pasha has Mesolénghi, to 


* Κρητικὸς ἀπὸ ra Χανιά. 

* This word is applied to 
any portion, however small, of 
the imperial revenue. To rob 
the hasné by open violence is 
one of the most heinous of of- 


fences in the eyes of the Turk- 
ish government; to do so by 
any other means, is the object 
and practice of every official 
man in Turkey. 


124 ETOLIA. [CHAP. 


which is attached Μαρία, a village of 50 houses, 
and Neokhori of 150; chorographically these form 
part of Karlili, as well as Vo6nitza at its opposite 
extremity, which is separated from it politi- 
cally, as being one of the Ex-Venetian places. 
As the inferior branches of revenue in Turkey are 
often farmed separately from the miri, Yusdf has 
that of the kharatj in Badrajik, Karpenisi, Kravari, 
and ’Epakto. 

Karlili', besides the towns of Vrakhori, Meso- 
lénghi, Anatoliké, and Vonitza, contains 140 vil- 
lages of various sizes; many of these, situated in 
the plain of Vrakhori, are mere tjiftliks belonging 
to the Turks of this town. The kaza, which con- 
tains all Acarnama, and a great part of Avtoha, 
is divided into four parts: Vlokhos, and Zygos, to 
the left of the Aspro; Valto and Xeromero, to 
the right. The two first are separated from one 
another by the northern bank of the middle lake, 
which is all included in Zygos, as the eastern lake 
is entirely in Apokuro, which district is bordered 
to the eastward by Kravari, as Zygos is by Vene- 
tikd, or the district of ‘Epakto. Apokuro is in- 
cluded in the Turkish kaza of Karpenisi; but 
Kravari is considered a separate district, of which 
the chief town is Lumbotina. Vlokhdé borders, 
northward, on ‘Agrafa, and Valto on the Arta 
kazasi; the latter includes the Makrinoro, and fol- 
lows the course of the Aspro as far as a line drawn 


1 This name is supposed on their first arrival they found 
to have been attached to the it in the possession of a Frank 
country by the Turks, because _ prince, named Charles Tocco. 


111. | ETOLIA. 125 


from the south-eastern extremity of the Gulf of Arta, 
until it meets the Aspro, about Angheldé-kastro. 
All the country westward of that line between the 
Aspro and the Gulf of Arta, constitutes Xeromero, 
which thus corresponds nearly with the ancient 
Acarnania. Badroc, though the ordinary meaning 
of the word is marsh, is said to be so called, as be- 
ing for the most part a woody desert. Xerdmero 
seems to have derived its name from its deficiency 
in water, when compared with Zygos, Valto, and 
Apokuro, and Zygés from the ridge of Aracynthus, 
though it contains also the level and lake at the 
foot of this mountain on either side. Apdkuro, 
as I before hinted, appears to be an ancient name 
corrupted. 

The whole of Karlili, with the exception of the 
principal town, has suffered excessively from the 
wars carried on between the kleftes and the Der- 
vént Aga, so that at present it does not contain, 
exclusively of the towns which I have named, a 
population of 20,000 souls. 

Anghelo-kastro, which is a conspicuous object 
from Vrakhori, is a ruined castle on the summit 
of a low peak at the north-western extremity of 
Mount Zygoés, not far from the Aspro. At the 
foot of the height, towards the river, is a small 
village of the same name. There are said to be 
some Hellenic foundations on the hill, as well as 
in the plain below it, marking probably the site of 
Conope, afterwards called Arsinoe. 

June 16.—A beautiful little bronze figure of 
Hercules, wanting an arm, which I observed yes- 
terday in my lodging, and which my host stated 


126 ATOLIA. [| CHAP. 


to have been brought from Vlokh6, a monastery 
on a lofty hill to the eastward of Vrakhori, where 
he described some extensive ruins, at once points 
out the probability of that place being the site 
of Thermus; which, at the time when Greek art 
was in perfection, was noted for its numerous 
statues'. Setting out this morning, therefore, 
at 5.5, and riding through currant grounds and 
vineyards, among which, on the left, are a kiosk 
and gardens of Yustf Aga, I cross, at 5.50, the 
river Ermitza, which issues from a ravine among 
the hills between Vrakhéri and Vlokhé ; in winter 
it covers a wide gravelly bed, and even now is 
a respectable stream. The name is encouraging 
to a search for Thermus, as it seems to be a 
corruption of that word. Instead of ascending 
to Vlokhé by the nearest way, we leave it on 
the left, and follow the plain towards the shore 
of the eastern lake, or lake of Apokuro, for the 
purpose of visiting another Paleé-kastro which has 
been described to me: pass through some fields 
of maize and corn, and numerous plane trees, 
and at 7.5 arrive at the remains of a Hellenic 
fortress, situated on a height one third of a mile 
distant from the edge of the lake, between which 
and the ruins stands a tyjiftlik, or zevgalatia, called 
Kavelo’. 

The entire circuit of the ancient fortifications 
still subsists, surrounding a height which forms the 
last slope of Mount Viéna. The circumference is 
about a mile. On the summit are the ruins of an 


1 Polyb. 1. 5, ¢. 9. > Κούβελος 


III. | ZETOLIA. 127 


oval Acropolis, ninety-five yards in length, flanked 
with towers on the exterior side, and towards the 
town defended by a double wall without towers. 
At the southern extremity of the oval, a semi-cir- 
cular tower, twenty-three feet in diameter, looks 
down upon and enfilades the whole line of the 
southern walls, of which a great part of the towers 
and curtains are still standing. This semi-circular 
tower is nearly complete, and has three windows 
in the middle of the curve. At the northern end - 
of the Acropolis are two towers formed of small 
stones and mortar, raised upon the ruins of the 
ancient walls, (a repair probably of the time of the 
lower Greeks or Franks,) and adjacent to them, on 
the northern town-wall, three or four of the ancient 
towers, with the intermediate curtains: of the rest 
of that front, which follows in a curve line the 
crest of the height towards a narrow vale grown 
with corn, there is very little left, and still less of 
the western side towards Kivelo and the lake. 
This fortress, standing on the foot of the mountain 
a little above the lake, was well placed to com- 
mand the passage along the shore to the eastward 
or southward, or in other words, the ancient route 
from Thermus and every part of the great Atolian 
plain, in the direction of the vale of the Evenus 
and Naupactus. Beyond the fortress, at the south- 
eastern end of the lake, the mountains descend 
quite to the water, and leave only a difficult road 
along the margin. 

This is far the largest of all the lakes of Acar- 
nania and Aitolia, and is so deep towards the 
extremity that it has the reputation of being un- 

12 


128 ZTOLIA. [CHAP. 


fathomable: it abounds in fish, but they are 
caught only in the shallows towards the cause- 
way, by means of mondoxyla, one of which is 
now lying near the shore at Kuvelo. On the op- 
posite shore of the lake, the slope of Mount Aracyn- 
thus is more gradual than it is on the shore of the 
western lake, or lake of Zygos, where, especially 
beyond Papadhates, the woody mountains extend 
to the water side. At the foot of the mountain, 
south-eastward of Ston Gambo, and opposite to 
Kavelo, there is a cultivated tract containing the 
village of Gavala, or Kavala’, and several tjiftliks. 
It is probably the territory of Trichonium, from 
which the lake took its ancient name. 

From Kivelo, after returning for half an hour 
by the same road, we turn out of it to the right, 
and begin to ascend the mountain of Vlokh6, which 
is very steep, and covered with a thick wood of 
oak’, ilex*, and holly-oak*. The ilex affords 
the best timber; its stem resembles that of the 
holly-oak ; the leaves are larger, (and not so 
prickly) smooth, small, and dark-coloured, oblong, 
pointed, and serrated, with serratures very long 
and close. Besides these trees, there are many 
ordinary shrubs, among which are wild olives, 
brambles, and wild vines, making the ride cool 
and agreeable, though the path is so bad that 
Philip and his army could hardly have taken more 
time to reach the summit than I do with a couple 
of Albanian soldiers. At length we arrive at a 


1 TxaBadra, Ka Bada. * ἀριὰ or dpede. 
* πιρνάρι or πουργάρι. 


2 δένδρον. 


rar. | ETOLIA. 129 


small grassy level surrounded by woody heights, 
and crossed by a brook shaded with planes, which 
descends from the summit of the hill. From hence 
upwards to the village of Vlokho the path is still 
steeper than before, and is traced in a zigzag 
among corn-fields, olive plantations, and pear- 
trees, bearing a small well-flavoured fruit now 
ripe: the wild pear also abounds. At the distance 
of an hour and a half from the kastro of Kuvelo 
we pass through Vlokhé, where are the sources 
which supply the rivulet, and about ten inhabited 
houses, with a large one in ruins, dispersed among 
some large walnut-trees. Two or three hundred 
yards higher up the hill, is another collection of 
cottages, with a little garden ground. These vil- 
lages and cultivated ground occupy a hollow un- 
der the summit of the mountain on the southern 
side, and stand about the centre of the site of the 
ancient city. 

At the upper village we find a monk belonging 
to the monastery which stands on the summit of 
the hill, and invite ourselves to dine there. He 
speedily procures a lamb, places it on the shoulders 
of one of the villagers, and thus accompanied we pro- 
ceed to the monastery. From the upper huts of 
Vlokho the ascent is very steep. Half-way to the 
summit we arrive at a part of the ancient wall, which 
followed the crest of a ridge descending from the 
citadel to the south-west. The wall was constructed 
of great masses of various shapes, accurately fitted 
to one another; higher up, near the foot of the 
Acropolis, the stones are still larger. One of 
them, a trapezium, measures ten feet by the 

VOL. I. K 


130 TOLIA. [CHAP. 


largest diagonal, and is six feet four inches broad ; 
another on the surface is equal to a square of 
seven feet and a half. Few are less than three or 
four feet. The Acropolis and its rocks are still 
towering above our heads, but we reach at length, 
by a zigzag road, a narrow passage between two 
parallel walls, which was evidently the approach 
to the gate of the Acropolis, and arrive at the 
monastery at the end of half an hour’s ride from 
the upper Vlokho. 

This building, dedicated to the Virgin and called 
the Panaghia of Vlokhos’, stands on an oval tabular 
level, bordered on all sides by steep rocks, but rather 
less difficult of approach on the western side, where 
we ascended. To the north-eastward the moun- 
tain slopes rapidly to a deep ravine between slopes 
cultivated with corn, on the opposite side of which 
rises the great mountain of Viéna, or Kyria Evghé- 
nia; an appellation which, according to the ka- 
loyéri of the convent, was derived from a βασιλο- 
ποῦλα, or princess Eugenia, who concealed herself, 
when pursued by her enemies, in a cavern which 
the monks point out to me just under the highest 
summit of the mountain, and there died. Who 
these ladies, Eugenia and Irene, were, whose 
names remain attached to two of the mountains 
of Actolia, it would be vain to conjecture with our 
scanty knowledge of the history of A%tolia under 


1 ἡ Παναγία τοῦ Bdwyov. gar form being the third case 
Names terminating in o¢ may with the preposition, as στὸν 
be pronounced either with or Βλωχὸν, and the final ν being 
without the final letter, the vul- _ usually dropt. 


III. | ETOLIA. 18] 


the Byzantine empire, for to that time the names 
are evidently to be referred. The other summits 
of Mount Viéna, which from its magnitude and 
central situation I conceive to be the Panztolium 
of Pliny’, are distinguished by the names of the 
nearest villages, the whole being called Viéna’, 
which is probably nothing more than a Bulgarian 
corruption of Evyévaa. The range terminates to 
the north in a peaked summit above the village 
of Arakhova, in the district of Karpenisi. Half 
way down from the retreat of the unfortunate 
princess, and immediately opposite to Vlokhd, 
stood a village of fifteen houses, named Lykokhori’, 
which about eight years ago fell down the side of 
the mountain, and disappeared with all the adjoin- 
ing soil; the inhabitants fortunately had retired, 
having taken warning from the previous trembling 
and cracking of the earth. Aware of what was 
likely to happen, the monks watched the place, 
but it slipped off in the night, and they heard only 
the awful crash. 

While our dinner is preparing, one of the monks 
guides and assists me in climbing up the rocks of 
an upper summit, by a path known only to them- 
selves. This height, which is named Ogla, is 200 
yards long and 30 broad, similar in shape to the 
entire summit of which it constitutes about a 
fourth part; and thus forming a sort of keep to 
this natural castle; its precipices on the further 
side from the monastery are a continuation with 
an increased height of those on the eastern 


tePlin, ET.) N.)1. 4, c. 2. > Βηένα. * Λυκοχώριον. 
κ 2 


132 ZETOLIA. [ CHAP. 


side of the entire hill. The summit of Ogla is level 
and carpeted, like the larger summit, with a delicate 
herbage. This fine geographical station compre- 
hends in its view to the southward Mount Khelmés 
beyond Kalavryta, and to the northward the vast ser- 
rated rock of Djumérka beyond Arta, points distant 
from each other more than 100 miles in a straight 
line. The mountains of ‘Agrafa are seen to the 
right of the latter, and other points more distant to 
the east, which are probably a part of Othrys. 
Cita and Parnassus are hid by Mount Viéna. The 
summits near the head of the Gulf of Arta are visible 
to the left of Djumérka, then the mountain of Suli, 
the Acarnanian heights near Vonitza, Varnaka and 
Tragamésti, and then the range of Zygos, above 
which appear the great mountain of Kefalonia, and 
the rocks of Oxia and Kurtzolari. Above the lofty 
hills at the end of the lake of Apokuro appear 
the mountains Varassova and Kaki-skala, and that 
of Rigani, above ‘Epakto, beyond which are the 
ereat Peloponnesian hills’Olono, Voidhia, and Khel- 
més. The plain of Vrakhori is extended in front 
of the prospect, with its three lakes, and the broad 
white bed of the Achelous, from which the modern 
name, Aspro, was evidently derived. The nearer 
country, at the back of the hills of Vlokho and 
Vrakhéri, is very rugged and mountainous as far 
as can be seen, nor do I perceive any cultivation, 
or a single village. Deep ravines surround the 
hill of Vlokhé on every side excepting to the south. 
On the west a stream shaded with planes follows 
the foot of the hill, traverses half-way down a little 
cultivation round a metokhi of the monastery, and 


III. | TOLIA. 133 


joins one of the lakes, near the causeway. Far- 
ther westward is a narrow valley watered by the 
Ermitza, the sources of which are at a considerable 
distance to the north. The springs at Vlokho form 
a branch of the rivulet flowing along the ravine 
which separates the hill of Vlokh6 from the moun- 
tain of Kyria Evghénia. Their junction and subse- 
quent discharge into the lake of Apokuro are not 
far westward of Kavelo. 

It is curious that Vlokhé, though of so little im- 
portance at present, not only stands on the site of 
the ancient capital, but still gives name to a great 
part of Atolia, of which it is in fact the natural 
citadel. The modern name is Sclavonic, and seems 
to indicate, that when the barbarians of that race 
conquered this part of Greece, in the decline of the 
Byzantine empire, the advantages of the site caused 
it to be their principal fortress, and the chief place 
of a large district. When the French were at Pré- 
vyza, and an invasion was expected, the Turks of 
Vrakhori prepared to retire for security to Vlokho’. 

The form and position of Thermus were such as 
the Greeks seem generally to have considered the 
most advantageous; namely, a triangle on the 
slope of a pyramidal hill, bordered on either 
side by a torrent flowing in a deep ravine, and 
having a summit convenient for an acropolis. 
The citadel was generally the apex of the tri- 
angle, and often itself, therefore, of a triangular 
form, but when the summit of the hill was level, 
the citadel was sometimes oval, such as I have 


* During the Greek revolution it again became of importance. 


134 ATOLIA. [ CHAP. 


already described at Kavelo, and at the ruins of 
Phigaleia and Theisoa in the Moréa. But this was 
probably a very ancient manner of fortifying, 
which was seldom followed in the meridian ages of 
Greece, when square towers and straight curtains 
were the general method. In the instance of 
Vlokho the ground was formed by nature for an 
oval acropolis. 

The entire circumference of the city was about 
two miles and a half; the walls are in best pre- 
servation on the western side. Here the founda- 
tions, with some of the lower courses of masonry, 
are to be seen, following the entire crest of the 
ridge ; in some places there are considerable pieces 
of the wall, all of polygonal masonry, though gene- 
rally of smaller stones than those which I de- 
scribed below the acropolis. 

There were no towers, but only short flanks at 
intervals of 60 or 100 yards: on the eastern side 
I could not trace any remains of the wall between 
the citadel and a small level about half-way down 
the hill, which was not far from the south-eastern 
angle of the city. But the fall on this side being 
much steeper, there was not so much necessity for 
defence as on the other side, where the easier decliv- 
ity not only required a stronger fortification, but has 
been the means of preserving it better than on the 
eastern side, where the materials as they have fallen 
may have rolled down the hill. To the south, the 
walls crossed some transverse ridges, on the borders 
of the hollow in which the two villages are situated, 
but considerably below the lower village. Little 
more than foundations are traceable on this side. 


111. | ZTOLIA. 135 


The only remains of a public edifice within the 
walls of this capital of one of the most influential 
people in Greece, and which, when it was taken 
by Philip, was noted for its riches, is a square 
pyramidal shapeless mass of stones, on a line with 
the cottages of upper Vlokhd, near the western 
wall. I inquired in vain for medals, or other re- 
mains of antiquity. 

At a little before 5 we begin to descend from the 
monastery, which is soon afterwards occupied by 
some guests less welcome ; namely, a body of ar- 
matoli, ranging the country, and living at the pub- 
lic expense. Turning at the upper huts of Vlokhd, 
to the right of the road, by which we mounted 
the hill, we cross the western wall, and descend 
the ridge along the outside of it as far as the south- 
western angle, where the southern wall of the town 
began to cross the valley. In the latter, a little 
beyond the angle, is a semi-circular retiring of the 
wall, about ten yards in diameter, with a plain 
unornamented opening in it which was evidently 
one of the principal gates of the city. The gate 
is not in the middle of the semi-circle, but a little 
to the left, and the whole construction furnishes an 
example of one of the many ingenious modes de- 
vised by the Greeks for strengthening their gates 
and the approaches to them. The semi-circle had 
the same intention as the square court which 15 
sometimes found before the gates of Hellenic 
cities; in the present instance it not only admitted 
of a concentration of missiles, particularly on the 
right or unshielded side of the enemy, but exposed 


136 TOLIA. [CHAP. 


him, when he had reached the gate, to the reverse 
of the western wall. 


Gate : 
mieten 


Leaving this spot at 5.45, we descend by zigzag 
paths, among the hills, to the ravine on the western 
side of the city, and having crossed the stream 
which flows along it, enter soon afterwards the plain 
of Vrakhéri; we then ride over a fine soil quite un- 
cultivated, in a direction parallel to the foot of the 
mountain, enter the currant grounds and vineyards 
of Vrakhéri, and at 7 cross the Ermitza at the 
mills where we passed it in the morning, following 
the same road from thence as before, and at half- 
past 7 re-entering Vrakhori. 

June 17.—This morning, at a few minutes before 
6, 1 proceed northward along the plain, in a direc- 
tion parallel to the foot of the hills, and at 6.25 
arrive at Zapandi, a village of 120 houses, two 
thirds of which are Turkish. After waiting a 
quarter of an hour for a guide, to ford the river, 
we begin to cross it at 7.20. In winter the passage 
is seldom attempted, the waters often filling the 
entire bed, whieh is not less than three quarters of 
a mile in width ; but at present the river is divided 
into five or six rapid streams, two of which only 
are large, and require a guide: not so much on 
account of their depth as because the bottom is a 
loose gravel and sand, with many holes and quick- 


111. | ACARNANIA. 137 


sands ; and the peramata or safe places for passing, 
shifting frequently, are well known only to those 
who reside on the spot. In the present season the 
afternoon’s storms in the mountains sometimes pro- 
duce sudden floods which are dangerous, but in the 
forenoon the river is generally passable. The water 
is now not higher than a Turkish stirrup, and we 
find no inconvenience except from the round stones 
at the bottom, which make the horse stumble occa- 
sionally. But the guide who walks alongside on 
foot, and leads the horse, quickly raises him when 
he makes a false step, encouraging him by his 
voice, and recommending to the rider to look at 
the bank, that the current may not make him 
giddy’. A little below the ford the bed is wider 
than where we cross it, and takes a turn to the 
westward. The dry part is covered with trunks of 
trees, the wintry spoils of the woods of Pindus. 
After a halt of half an hour on the right bank, 
we reach at 8.24 the ruins of a large Hellenic 
town, undoubtedly Stratus; for Stratus, according 
to the ancient authorities, stood on the right bank 
of the Achelous, in the same plain which contained 
the lake Trichonis, and at a distance of 200 stades 
from the sea, by the course of the river? : all which 


‘ yd μὴ τοῦ σκοτίση τὸ τρε- ἐστι Kal Στράτος καὶ τὸ Τριχώ- 
χούμενον. γιον, ἀρίστην ἔχον γῆν. 

* Στράτος ἀναπλοῦν ἔχουσα Strabo, p. 450. 
τῷ ᾿Αχελώῳ πλειόνων ἢ διακο- Thucyd. 1. 2, c. 80,102; 1.3, 
σίων σταδίων . 5.106: Xenoph. Hellen. 1. 4, 


ἀρχαῖαν (Αἰτωλίαν) ς, 6: Diodor. 1 12, ο. 47,1. 19, 
μὲν, τὴν ἀπὸ rov’Axedwou μέχρι ς, 67: Folyo. 1. 4. c..63, 1. 5, 
Καλυδῶνος παραλίαν ἐπὶ πολὺ ς, 6, 14, 96; Liv. 1. 36, c. 11, 
καὶ τῆς μεσογαίας εἰνήκουσαν, 1. 48, ο. 22. ; 


ae \ , Irs 
EVRaAP TOU TE “και πεδιάδος" ἢ 


138 ACARNANIA. [CHAP. 


accords perfectly with this place. The eastern wall 
of the city followed the bank of the river, just at 
the point where it touches the last falls of the hills 
of Valto, which are here low, but rise gradually to 
the north-north-west, and extend to the head of 
the Gulf of Arta, where they terminate abruptly 
in the pass of Makrinoro: a parallel ridge rises 
gradually from the plain not far to the south- 
westward of Stratus, and ends at the Gulf of 
Arta in the hill called Sparto-vani. Between 
these two ridges lies a long valley commencing 
at the ruins of Stratus, and at a village oppo- 
site to it called Lepent, and terminating to the 
north-west in an easy pass, through which is a 
descent into the plain of Xerdkambo, near the 
south-eastern corner of the Gulf of Arta. It is evi- 
dent from this construction of the country, that Stra- 
tus was a military position of importance. Being 
situated at the point where the valley of Lepent 
meets that of the Achelous, and where they both 
open into the great Avtohan plain, it commanded 
two of the principal approaches to that plain from 
the northward, at the same time that it was not far 
removed from a third, which I shall presently have 
occasion to mention. 

The first object in the ruins of Stratus that 
strikes the traveller after crossing the river, is a 
small door in the south-eastern angle of the town 
wall. Thirty yards below it, on the water side, 
are some foundations, whether those of the peri- 
bolus of a temple, or belonging to a wharf, it is 
impossible to say. The door has a semicircular 
top, not constructed on the principles of the arch, 
but by hollowing the horizontal courses of stone 


III. | ACARNANIA. 139 


into a semicircular form, in the same manner as 
is seen in many places, both in Greece and Egypt. 
The door is 10 feet high, and 5 feet 6 inches wide; 
the stones very large, and, as commonly occurs 
in Greek fortresses, larger than in the other parts 
of the wall. This door leads into an uneven space 
about a mile in circumference, surrounded on all 
sides by remains, more or less traceable, of the 
town walls, which are of the third kind of ma- 
sonry, in some parts nearly approaching to the 
most regular species. Half way from the door, 
towards the highest part of the inclosure which is 
diagonally opposite to the gate, are the remains 
of a theatre, situated in a hollow, having its right 
side near the western wall of the above-mentioned 
enclosure, and fronting the south. Its interior 
diameter below is 105 feet, and there seem to 
have been about thirty rows of seats, all of which 
might probably be brought to light by excavation. 
But this inclosure towards the river, which con- 
tained the theatre, was not much more than a 
third of the whole city. The remainder stood on 
lower and more even ground, and the circuit of 
its walls, which are every where traceable, occu- 
pied the summits of several heights which border 
the valley of Lepent, or follow the contour of the 
ridges uniting those heights. The wall which 
parted the two portions of the city terminates 
at the north-western summit before mentioned. 
Here seems to have been a small citadel, but 
it was scarcely higher than the adjoining part 
of the same ridge on the outside of the walls, 


and at the distance of two or three hundred 
12 


140 ACARNANIA. [cHaAP. 


yards was commanded, together with almost 
the entire site, by the external heights. A gate 
remains in the partition wall, near the summit, 
a little beyond which, to the westward, are some 
ruined huts, and some fruit-trees, once belonging 
to the village of Surovigli'. In the northern wall 
of the greater or western inclosure, a little be- 
low the summit, are some towers and intervening 
curtains, which are almost perfect. The cireum- 
ference of the western inclosure appears to be 
between two and three thousand yards, and the 
entire circuit of the city about two miles and a 
half. The arm of the Achelous (for the river is 
here divided into several streams), which flows at 
the foot of the eastern wall, although narrow, is 
rapid, deep, and difficult to pass, even at this 
season, so that the river was a considerable pro- 
tection to the place. As a fortress, however, 
Stratus could not have been considered very 
strong when poliorcetics were in the state of im- 
provement which they reached after the time of 
Alexander. 

The external ridge commanding the citadel illus- 
trates one of the circumstances of the attempt made 
by Perseus to occupy Stratus, in the winter of the 
year B.C. 170—169. The king, who having under- 
taken the expedition at the request of the Epirotes, 
had marched through their country, was met on the 
frontiers of Aitolia by Archidamus, the strategus 
of AXtolia, who accompanied him to Stratus, then 
belonging to the /tolian confederacy. But as usual 
in the states of Greece, there were two factions in 


1 Σουροβίγλι. 


IIT. | ACARNANIA. 141 


/Etolia, and while Archidamus was proceeding to 
meet Perseus, the opposite party had sent for 
Popillius, who was at Ambracia, and who entered 
the city with a thousand men, on the very night that 
Perseus encamped upon the Achelous, near Stra- 
tus. Dinarchus also, commander of the cavalry of 
Aitolia, who had come ostensibly to meet Perseus, 
joined the adverse side, and entered the city. 
The king, nevertheless, having with him an army 
of 10,000 men, and the chief magistrate of Etolia, 
still hoped that the Aitolians in the town would 
come out and join him, and with this view pre- 
sented himself on the heights above the city; but 
finding that instead of any advances to a com- 
munication he was threatened with missiles, he 
retired five miles to the river Petitarus, and from 
thence to Aperantia’. 

The summit of the ruins commands a fine view 
of the Aspropétamo upwards, and of the hilly 
country near its banks, terminated by the moun- 
tains of ‘Agrafa in the distance; the quantity of 
snow on which seems to show that the highest 
summits are nearly equal in height to ‘Olono and 
Khelmés. At less than two hours above Suro- 
vigli, the river is joined, on the same side, by a 
tributary which originates to the eastward of Mount 
Makrinoro, and at an equal distance beyond the river 
are the ruins of another Hellenic city, at a village 
near the right bank, named Prevéntza. The river 
I take to be the Petitarus, if this name be correct 
in the text of Livy, and the ruins those of the 
town of Aperantia, of which Prevéntza may be 


1 Liv. 1. 48, ο. 21. 


142 ACARNANIA. _ [CHAP. 


a corruption. Livy indeed seems to allude to 
Aperantia only as a district; but Stephanus, in 
reference to the corresponding passage of Poly- 
bius, which is lost, shows the city also to have 
been named ᾿Απεράντεια. The general situation of 
the place accords with a transaction relating to 
Aperantia, which occurred twenty years before the 
expedition of Perseus, and which is recorded by 
Polybius and by Livy in nearly the same terms. 
When Amynander had recovered his kingdom of 
Athaiania from Philip, the Aitolians who had as- 
sisted him thought the opportunity favourable for 
recovering Aperantia and Amphilochia for them- 
selves. Nicandrus, the strategus, therefore, pro- 
ceeding first into Amphilochia, probably because 
it was the more important of the two, although more 
distant from AXtolia, found the greater part of the 
people ready to receive him, and met with easy 
success; he then moved into Aperantia with the 
same result, and from thence proceeded into Do- 
lopia, where the people, having never belonged to 
JEtolia, hesitated at first to receive him, but on 
learning the state of affairs, and that Philip had 
no farther hopes from their neighbours, the Atha- 
manes, they jomed the AMtolians ΄. 

While I was seated in the theatre, a drove of 
300 Wallachian oxen, every one of which was 
white, passed through the ruins to Tragamésti to 
be shipped for the Islands. Besides these, which 
are on their passage from Wallachia, large herds 
and flocks are brought to feed in the winter and 
spring in the plains of Acarnania and Aztolia from 


* Polyb. 1.;22.,.c..8. 1 Livy, b δύο. 


III. | ACARNANIA. 143 


‘Agrafa, and the other mountainous districts around 
Thessaly. The oxen of the latter countries are 
generally dark coloured. 

Leaving the ruins of Stratus at 10.15, we as- 
cend the valley which branches from the plain to 
the north-westward, and arrive at 11 at Lepend, 
or Lepenié', a village of forty families, on the 
side of the valley opposite to Surovigli. In the 
vale just below it, are some copious sources of 
water. Lepeni is one of the principal villages of 
Valto, but has much diminished in population, 
from the same causes which have annihilated 
Surovigli. Being quickly driven out of the house 
of the Proéstds by the fleas, I remove to the gate 
of the court-yard, which having, as usual in this 
part of the country, a large tiled roof, affords 
sufficient shelter in this season. 

The Proéstés confirms several Hellenic positions 
which | have heard of, but not yet seen. In 
“ΖΕ οΐϊα those of Anghelokastro, Papadhates, and 
St. George, seem to be the most remarkable; the 
last is reckoned three hours from Anghelokastro. 
Some monks of St. George, who came here lately, 
afirmed that the kastro at Surovigli is not to be 
compared to theirs, by which perhaps they meant 
only that the walls of the latter are in better pre- 
servation. A peasant, whom 1 encountered in the 
ruins at Surovigli, remarked that the city was the 
capital of the surrounding country. He judged 
merely from their extent; for probably not an in- 


* Aerevov, Λεπενιόν. The the Albanian manner, with a 
former is the more vulgar form, guttural L, Liepent. 
and is generally pronounced in 


144 ACARNANIA. [CHAP. 


dividual in Acarnania or /tolia has ever heard of 
the name or history of Stratus. 

It is chiefly from the narrative given by Poly- 
bius’ of the capture of Thermus by Philip, son of 
Demetrius, that we obtain a knowledge of the 
ancient geography of the central part of Aitolia, 
or great inland plain now occupied by Vrakhéri, 
from which the chief strength and opulence of 
this province of Greece has in all ages been 
derived. In the second year of the Social War 
B. C. 218, Philip, taking advantage of the ab- 
sence of Dorimachus with half the tolian forces 
in Thessaly, raised the siege of Paleea in Cephal- 
lenia, and sailed to Leucas, from whence, after 
having caused his ships to be dragged across the 
Dioryctus, or sandy isthmus of Leucas, he entered 
the Ambracic Gulf, and reached Limnza on the 
morning after his arrival at Leucas. Having been 
joined by all the forces of Acarnania, he moved 
from Limnea towards the evening’ without bag- 
gage. At the end of sixty stades, he halted to 
allow his troops to repose and take their supper ; 
and then, continuing his route all night, arrived 
at the break of day on the river Achelous, between 
Stratus and Conope. His treacherous counsellor, 
Leontius, wished to give time to the A¢tolians to 
defend themselves ; but the better advice of Aratus 
having prevailed, Philip gave orders for an imme- 
diate advance to Thermus, the Aitolian capital. 
Crossing the river, therefore, and marching with 
all speed towards that city, he passed, on his left, 
Stratus, Agrinium, and Thestia, and, on his right, 


2. ἀναζεύξας ἐκ τῆς Λιμναίας 


δείλης. —c. 6. 


’ Polyb. 1. 5, c..5, et seq. 


111. | ATOLIA. 145 


Conope, Lysimachia, Trichonium, and Phyteeum', 
and thus arrived at Metapa, situated sixty stades 
from Thermus, in thé defile of the lake Trichonis ’, 
the passage along which was rendered very nar- 
row and dangerous by the rugged woody moun- 
tains on its margin’. The Aitolians having 
abandoned Metapa, he occupied it with five hun- 
dred men, to serve as a protection to him, as well 
in advancing as in returning through the straits *. 
He then conducted his army in column, protecting 
his right by some light troops thrown out on that 
flank, while his left was defended by the lake for a 
distance of thirty stades *. At the end of this dis- 
tance from Metapa, he arrived at a town ° named 
Pamphium, and leaving a guard there, then 
ascended to Thermus by a road which was thirty 
stades in length, very steep, bordered by danger- 


1 Thisnamevariesinthe MSS. 
but Φύταιον is the orthography 
of Stephanus, who refers to a 
lost passage of the 11th book 
of Polybius, which contained 
the narrative of a second occu- 
pation of Thermus by Philip, 
as we learn from a few lines of 
that part of the 11th book still 
existing. Mention was there 
again made of the lake Tri- 
chonis and of Phytzeum, as well 
as of another Atolian town, 
named Hellopium (vide Ste- 
phan. in ᾽Ελλόπιον). 

* ἣ κεῖται μὲν ἐπ᾽ αὐτῆς τῆς 
Τριχωνίδος λίμνης καὶ τῶν παρὰ 

VOL. I. 


, ~ 9 , \ ‘ 
ταύτῃ στενῶν, ἀπέχει δὲ σχεδὸν 
ἑξήκοντα στάδια, τοῦ προσαγο- 
ρευομένου Ogppov.—Polyb. 1. 5, 
δ᾽ 7: 

3, .» \ 4 ~ ε \ 

ἐστὶ γὰρ πᾶς ὃ παρὰ τὴν 

λίμνην τόπος ὀρεινὸς καὶ τρα- 
‘i ~ 

KVC, συνηγμένος ταῖς ὕλαις, διὸ 

Ἁ - \ ‘ , 
Kal παντελῶς στεγὴν καὶ δυσδίο- 

᾽ 
δον ἔχει τὴν πάροδον. 

* βουλόμενος ἐφεδρείᾳ χρή- 
σασθαι πρός τε τὴν εἴσοδον καὶ 
τὴν ἔξοδον τὴν ἐκ τῶν στενῶν. 

> τὴν μὲν γὰρ ἐκ τῶν εὐωνύ- 
μων ἐπιφάνειαν τῆς πορείας ἠσ- 

yA , οἷ Sa τ / 
φαλίσθη λίμνῃ σχεδὸν ἐπὶ rpu'- 
κοντα στάδια. 

6 ls 

κώμη. 


146 ATOLIA. [CHAP. 


ous precipices on either side, and in some places 
very narrow. 

Having arrived at Thermus considerably before 
the close of day, he gave permission to his army 
to plunder all the surrounding villages, to overrun 
the plain of the Thermii,. and to sack the city 
itself, which was well furnished with corn and 
other provisions, and abounded with riches of 
every kind, having long been the place of meeting 
of the national assemblies, the centre of the civil 
and religious as well as commercial affairs of 
/Etolia; and, from the strength of its situation, 
considered as the place of refuge and Acropolis of 
all Aitolia’. The temple of Apollo? in particular, 
with its surrounding buildings, was full of valu- 
able furniture and offerings. On the morning after 
their arrival, the Macedonians separated the part 
of the plunder which they intended to carry away, 
and burnt the remainder in heaps before their 
tents; in which manner they destroyed, among 
other things, an immense quantity. of armour. 
They burnt, or razed to the ground, the temple, 
with its stoee, and threw down all the statues, 
breaking those which were not figures of the gods 
or inscribed with their names. The number of 
images thus demolished or subverted, was not less 
than two thousand. ; 

Such an act of destruction and impiety was very 


1 ὥστε τῆς συμπάσης Airw- temple was dedicated, is ‘men- 
diac οἷον ἀκροπόλεως ἔχειν tioned only in the fragment of 
the 11th book of Polybius. 


rakuy.—c. 8. 
2 The deity to whom the 


111. | ETOLIA. 147 


repugnant to the manners of Greece, and is se- 
verely censured by Polybius, notwithstanding the 
. provocation which Philip had recently received in 
the similar conduct of the Aitolians at Dium and 
Dodona ; against the former of which places their 
vengeance had been particularly directed, as being 
a Macedonian city. But the young monarch was 
not sufficiently gifted with magnanimity to abstain 
from retaliation on so fair an opportunity ; indeed, 
it seems to have been the great object of his expe- 
dition, and accordingly he inscribed upon the 
ruined wall of the temple, a senarian iambic, 
composed by a young poet who accompanied him, 
for the purpose of reminding the AXtolians that the 
shaft of vengeance came from Dium!'. Philip 
then began his retreat by the same road by which 
he came. Three thousand Attolians, under Alex- 
ander of Trichonium, who were lying in wait for 
the purpose, attacked the rear, consisting of mer- 
cenaries and Acarnanians, as they began to move 
from the city, and had put them ἰδ flight, when a 
body of Illyrians, whom Philip, with a view to 
such a contingency, had placed behind a certain 
height’, met them in the pursuit, and killed or 
made prisoners between two and three hundred of 
them. The rear then set fire to Pamphium, passed 
the defiles*, and joined the Macedonians, who 
had already arrived at Metapa. 

The next day the invaders, having destroyed 


* Ὁρᾷς τὸ Δῖον, οὗ βέλος διέπτατο ;—c. 9. 


ἡ ὑπό τινα λόφον ὑπεστάλκει βάσει.----ο. 18. 


\ XN ᾽ - ΄ 
τοὺς Ἰλλυριοὺς ἐν τῇ κατα- 3. διελθόντες τὰ στενά. 


Ὁ 


148 ZETOLIA. [ CHAP. 


Metapa, marched to Acre, and on the following 
day to Conope, where they remained one day ; 
they then followed the left bank of the river, as 
far as Stratus, crossed it near that city, and halted 
just without the reach of missiles from the walls, 
thereby offering battle to a body of three thousand 
/Etolians, who with some cavalry and Cretans had 
recently entered the place. But it was not until 
the Macedonians resumed their march that the 
enemy came forth. The rear then turned, drove 
back the A&tolians to the gates of the city, and 
killed one hundred of them; after which, Philip, 
prosecuting his march without further impediment, 
rejoined his vessels at Limnea, and returned to 
Leucas. | 

The preceding narrative, when compared with 
Strabo, will enable us with some confidence to affix 
the ancient names to the principal existing remains 
of the cities of the interior of A.tolia, notwithstand- 
ing that there is one part of it which I have found 
impossible to réconcile with an actual view of the 
country. From the south-eastern extremity of the 
Gulf of Arta, where it is evident that Limnza was 
situated, there is a route for the most part level of 
about twenty-five miles, as far as the Achelous below 
Stratus, so that it was not very difficult for Philip, 
by performing about a third of the distance on the 
evening of his departure from Limneea, to effect the 
other two thirds in the course of the night. The re- 
maining distance of about fifteen miles to Thermus 
seems equally conformable to the proceedings of 
the army on the second day, when we may easily 
τ conceive that the march to Metapa, which was not 


IIL. | TOLIA. 149 


so rapid as to prevent Philip from burning and 
destroying the country’, added to the preparations 
for the passage along the lake to Pamphium, and 
the usual loss of time in the course of such a 
march, may have consumed, together with the 
long and painful ascent to Thermus, all the fore- 
noon and two hours of the afternoon, about which 
time the Macedonians seem to have arrived at the 
city. The difficulty in the narrative is, that Philip, 
in advancing from Metapa to Pamphium, should 
have marched with his left upon a lake; since, 
according to the present state of the country, there 
is no apparent reason why -he should have ap- 
proached either of the lakes, the route from the 
Aspro by Vrakhori to Vlokhd, not passing within 
three miles of them. Or if we suppose that the 
woods noticed by Polybius then occupied so much 
of the plain below Vrakhori, as to force him to 
follow the margin of the lake, and that Metapa 
stood about the junction of the river Ermitza with 
the lake, the distance of that pomt from Vlokh6 
being nearly equal to the sixty stades, which the 
historian assigns as that between Metapa and Ther- 
mus: still it is obvious that an army moving from 
thence to the foot of the mountain of Vlokhé would 
have had its right and not its left towards the 
marshes. In order to have approached Vlokhé 
with his left on one of the lakes, Philip must either 
have made the circuit of them both, along the foot 
of Mount Zygés, and then, after rounding the ex- 
tremity of the lake of Apokuro, and passing by the 


* dpa δὲ προάγων ἐδήου καὶ κατέφθειρε τὴν Yapav.—c. 7. 


150 ATOLIA. [CHAP. 


foot of Mount Viéna along the steep and woody 
mountains which overhang the lake, have emerged 
into the plain again near Kavelo, or he must have 
crossed between the lakes by the line of the 
modern causeway, and entered the plain between 
Vrakhéri and Kivelo. On the former supposition 
Metapa would have been near the eastern ex- 
tremity of the lake of Apdokuro. 

It was impossible, however, for the Macetioniasiiy 
immediately after a forced march from Limnea to 
the Achelous, to have performed even the shorter 
of these routes, which would have tripled the 
direct distance from the Achelous to Thermus ; or 
certainly, if such a march were practicable, they 
could not have arrived at Thermus at the hour 
which the subsequent transactions of that day 
render necessary.. Possibly it may be thought that 
the ruins at Kuvelo, although very short of 60 
stades from Thermus, are those of Metapa, and 
that Philip, after having conducted his army 
directly from the Achelous across the plain of 
Vrakhori, occupied the fortress at Kdavelo, not 
with the view of retreating through the passes 
commanded by it, which lead along the lake in 
an easterly direction, but merely to protect his 
operation from any interruption on that side. The 
purpose seems useful, and the post well suited to 
it, and we might suppose that in consequence of 
his possession of it, the /Xtolians were induced 
to attack his rear in a different place, just as it 
began to retire from Thermus. The deviation to 
Kavelo would only have added another hour to his 
march, and in moving from Kivelo to Vlokhé the 


IIT. | ETOLIA. 151 


Macedonians might for a short distance have had 
their left on the lake. But it is impossible to be 
satisfied with this explanation. The historian gives 
positive testimony that the oreva, or passes on the 
borders of the lake, were between Pamphium and 
Metapa, from the latter of which on his return he 
proceeded by Acre to Conope : it seems inevitably 
to follow, therefore, that Metapa was at the western 
entrance of the passes, about eight miles to the 
south-westward of Thermus. The only conclusion 
seems to be, that the words right and left have, 
by some negligence either of the historian or 
his copyers, been substituted for each other in 
the text. Experience proves that such an error, 
notwithstanding its importance, is one of the most 
common that occurs. With this change every 
thing is clear, Metapa having stood near the lake 
immediately below Vrakhori, around which site 
there were probably woods making the passage 
dificult. As to Trichonis having been the eastern 
lake, whereas I suppose Philip to have marched 
chiefly along the western, that is easily reconciled 
by the fact that they are only divisions of the same 
lake, which communicate at the causeway, whence 
in common parlance the larger division may often 
have given name to the whole. 

I have not entertained the supposition that 
Thermus could have occupied any other site than 
that of Vlokh6, the description of Polybius, but 
still more the magnitude of the ruins leaving 
scarcely a reasonable doubt on this head in the 
same manner as the extent of those at Surovigli 
are a strong confirmation of their being the remains 


152 ZETOLIA. [cHaAP. 


of Stratus. If we were to suppose Thermus to have 
stood on the southern side, or at the eastern end 
of the lake of Apdékuro, in which case Philip might 
certainly have approached it, with his left defended 
by the lakes, it would in that case have been situ- 
ated on Mount Aracynthus, or on the mountain 
which separates that lake from the valley of the 
Evenus, and would have been at no great dis- 
tance from Calydon and the sea-coast, instead of 
having been far in the interior towards the great 
mountains of Aitolia and the centre of the province, 
as every evidence respecting Thermus seems clearly 
to indicate. 

Of the places which the Macedonian army 
left on either hand in their march towards Ther- 
mus, after having crossed the Achelous, namely, 
Conope, Lysimachia, Trichonium, and Phyteum 
on the right, and Agrinium and Thestia on the 
left, there can be little doubt that Conope stood at 
Angheldkastro ; for, besides the testimony derived 
from Polybius in his narrative of the capture of 
Thermus, from which we learn that it was on the 
eastern side of the river at a considerable distance 
below Stratus, the same author in relating *some 
movements of Philip in Acarnania, in the year 
preceding that of the capture of Thermus, indi- 
cates it as standing at about twenty stades from 
the Achelous’, which perfectly agrees with the 
distance of Anghelékastro from the Aspro. Stra- 
bo, moreover, as well as Polybius, intimates that 
it was near one of the ordinary passages of the 


* Polybius, 1. 4, c. 64. 


111. | ZETOLIA. 153 


Achelous, which is now the case as to Angheld- 
kastro, and arises in fact from permanent geogra- 
phical causes. 

Conope having received considerable augmenta- 
tion from Arsinoé, sister and wife of Ptolemy 
Philadelphus, assumed her name instead of that 
of Conope. Polybius, however, in relating trans- 
actions which occurred thirty years after the time 
of Ptolemy Philadelphus, still names it Conope. 
The neighbouring city which stood at Papa- 
dhates, near the lake of Zygés, seems clearly to 
have been Lysimachia, for Strabo describes the 
ruins of that city to have been between Pleuron 
and Arsinoé, on a lake then called Lysimachia, 
but more anciently Hyria’, which agrees perfectly 
with the position of Papadhates, supposing Plewron 
to have been at Kyria Irini, and Arsinoé at 
Anghelékastro. This position of Lysimachia ac- 
cords also with the march of Antiochus from the 
Maliac Gulf in the year B.C. 191, when, having 
appointed Stratus as the place for meeting the 
/tolians, he marched thither by Naupactus, Caly- 
don, and Lysimachia®. We may infer from the 
name of this city, that it was founded by Lysima- 
chus, when, as King of Macedonia, his dominion 
extended over the greater part of Greece. If the 
site was occupied more anciently, the name of the 
town may possibly have been Hyrie, in like manner 
as in later times both town and lake were named Ly- 
simachia. As Antoninus Liberalis, in relating the 


* εὐφυῶς ἐπικειμένη πως TH ? Strabo, p. 460. 
τοῦ ᾿Αχελώου drafsaoer.—Stra- 3 Liv. 1. 36, c. 11. 
bo, p. 460. 


14 )]ἢ᾽ ETOLIA. [CHAP. 


fable of the conversion of Cycnus into a swan, gives 
to the lake in which Cycnus destroyed himself the 
name of Conope’, it is evident that the ancients 
considered the lake of Zygés as the scene of this 
fable, and it becomes probable, therefore, that 
Ovid, who in describing the same metamorphosis, 
couples the Cycneia Tempe with Hyrie’, alluded 
by the former name to the Klistra of Zygos, 
which is precisely such a place as the Greeks 
denominated a Tempe. 
The river Cyathus, which, according to Poly- 
bius, as quoted by Athenzus*, flowed near Ar- 
sinoé, corresponds to the stream which, issuing 
from the lake of Zygés, joins the Achelous, not 
far from Anghelokastro. -The principal sources 
which form both the lakes are at the foot of the 
steep mountain overhangmg the eastern, or lake 
of Apokuro; a current flows from east to west 
through the two lakes: and the river of Angheldé- 
kastro, or Cyathus, is nothing more than. a‘ con- 
tinnation of the same stream. Acree stood perhaps - 
at the place where the river emerges from the lake, 
this being about midway between the positions 
which I have assigned to Metapa and Conope. 
Notwithstanding the opinion of the antiquaries 
of Strabo’s time, who pomted out some ruims*at— 
the foot of Mount Aracynthus, near: Pleuron, as 
those of the Homeric Olenus, there is difficulty in 
believing that Olenus and Pleuron were so near to 
each other. It seems more probable that Olenus 


* Antonin. Liberal. fab. 12. 
* Inde lacus Hyries videt et Cycneia Tempe. 
> Athen. 1. 10. c. 6. Ovid Met. 1. 7, v. 871... 


iit. | ATOLIA. 155 


occupied some advantageous site in the dominions 
of the Calydonian dynasty, such as that of Gavala, 
where Trichonium afterwards stood. 

The notice taken of Trichonium by several 
ancient authors’, as well as the circumstance 
of its having given name to the largest of the 
/Etolian lakes, shows it to have been the principal 
town of the plains, which, according to Strabo, 
extended from Trichonium to Stratus. The occur- 
rence of its name after that of Lysimachia, among 
the cities on the right of Philip in his progress 
towards Thermus, places it beyond a doubt towards 
the south-eastern extremity of the plains, where 
Gavala, in a fertile district on the southern side of 
the Lake of Apokuro, seems perfectly to correspond 
to the data. Phyteeum, having been the last town 
on the right of Philip’s line of march, answers to 
the ruined polis at Kuvelo, that being moreover 
the only place, besides Gavala, where any open 
country is left between the woody mountains and 
the shore of the lake. 

Agrinium and Thestia received their names from 
Agrius and Thestius, two Aitolian chiefs of the 
royal race of Calydon and Pleuron, who, in pro- 
cess of time, obtained possessions farther in the 
interior’ ; for the A‘tolians, who went with Thoas to 
the Trojan war, were all from the districts of Zy- 
gos and Apdokuro. It is evident that Agrinium 
was not far from the Achelous, as well from the 
march of Philip as from an occurrence of the year 


* Polyb. 1. 4, c. 3; 1.5, c. Τριχώνιον. Strabo, p. 450. 
Teaet 1. 17, c. 10. Pausan. * Strabo, p. 461, et seq. 
Corinth. c. 37. Stephan. in 


156 JETOLIA. [CHAP. III. 


B.C. 314, related by Diodorus, when Agrinium 
was in alliance with Acarnania against the AXto- 
lians, and when Cassander marched from Mace- 
donia into AXtolia to assist the Acarnanes.. By his 
advice the Acarnanes concentrated their forces, by 
withdrawing from their smaller fortresses into 
Stratus, Agrinium, and Ithoria’. As soon as 
Cassander departed, after leaving a garrison in 
Agrinium, the Aitolians besieged it; and when 
the inhabitants marched out upon capitulation, 
treacherously fell upon them in the route, and 
massacred the greater part of them. It may be 
inferred from the two testimonies, that Agrinium 
was not far from Zapandi. Thestia was probably 
on the heights above Vrakhori, towards the sources 
of the Ermitza. The river Campylus, upon which 
the historian states that Cassander encamped, and 
held a council with the Acarnanes on his arrival 
in /Etolia, seems, from all the circumstances men- 
tioned by the historian, to have been that great 
branch of the Achelous, which joins it between 
Tetarna and Surovigli, not far below the former. 


1 οἱ πλεῖστοι μὲν εἰς Zrparovy is easy. δΔΕεριεῖς, or Δοριεῖς, 


πόλιν συνῴκησαν ὀχυρωτάτην 
οὖσαν καὶ μεγίστην" Οἰνιάδαι δὲ 
καί τινες ἄλλοι συνῆλθον ἐπὶ 
Σαυρίαν, Δεριεῖς (αἰ. Δοριεῖς) 
μεθ᾽ ἑτέρων εἰς ᾿Αγρίνιον.--- 
Diodor. 1. 19, c. 67. Ithoria 
having been, as we know from 
Polybius (1. 4, c. 64), beyond 
Conope, towards Ciniade, the 
correction ᾿Ιθωρίαν for Σαυρίαν 


though it has rather more the 
appearance of correctness, is not 
free from suspicion, the name 
not being mentioned by any 
other author. If correct, we 
may suppose that Derium or 
Dorium was a town on the 
/Etolian side of the Achelous, 
as its people retired into Agri- 
nium. 


CHAPTER IV. 


ACARNANTIA, EPIRUS. 


Departure from Lepeni—Kekhreniatza—Kekhrenia —Amvra- 
kia — Sparto — Stanu — Kervasaré — Spartovani—Limnea— 
Lutraki— Balimbey—V6nitza—Punta, Actium— Prévyza— 
Port Vathy—Ex-Venetian places— Nicopolis— Mikhalitzi, 
hill of Apollo—Sail from Prévyza to Salaghora—Arta, Ambra- 
cia—River Arachthus—Siege of Ambracia by Fulvius—Am- 
bracus—Craneia—Oreite. 


June 18.—The direct route from Lepent to Am- 
vrakia passes along the foot of the hill of Lepena, 
and leaving on the left the lake of Lygovitzi, which 
discharges its superfluous waters into the right side 
of the Achelous, enters a pass between the ridges of 
Makhala and Lepent, and then follows the eastern 
bank of the lake of Valto to Amvrakia, which vil- 
lage by this road is seven hours distant. Wishing 
to explore a little more of the district of Valto than 
the direct road affords, I send the baggage that 
way; and taking with me two of the Albanian 
escort, which Yusaf Aga provided for me, follow 
up the valley of Lepent. It soon becomes narrow 
and quite uncultivated. As we advance, the hills 
on either side become higher, and the bushes below 
thicker, until at 5.45 we enter a wood of small 
oaks, mixed with ilex and prinus, ascending gently 
by a pleasant shady path, until having arrived at 


158 ACARNANIA. [CHAP. 


the summit of the pass we begin at 7 to descend, 
and at 7.15 arrive at the ruins of some Hellenic 
walls. One of them crosses the road; others are 
with difficulty traced among the trees. They are 
the outworks of a fortress which occupied a height 
to the left of the road, and was naturally strength- 
ened on two sides by a deep ravine and torrent ; 
thus placed, it commanded the access by this valley 
from Amphilochia to the great plain of the Ache- 
lous. Within the inclosure, a little to the left of 
the road, a circular excavation in the ground, 
thirty-four feet in diameter, is lined with regular 
masonry of nearly equal courses, one of the stones 
of which measures four feet six inches in length, 
and two feet eight inches in height. On one side 
of the circle there remain eight courses overgrown 
with trees and bushes, on the other the slope of 
the bank covers the masonry. Near the walls of 
the fortress, on the outside, there is an ordinary 
ancient sepulchre, which has never been opened. 
The ruins are called the Paledkastro of Kekhreni- 
atza. The latter name is applied to the pass, and 
to a brook to which I descend in five minutes, 
after a halt of fifty minutes. 

The wall which crosses the road follows it after- 
wards for three minutes towards the brook. It has 
in some places six courses of masonry of the third 
kind, nearly approaching to the fourth, and very 
accurately joined, except where trees growing on 
the top have displaced the stones, with their 
roots. The brook of Kekhreniatza winds through 
a little uneven vale, ending in a small plain on 
the shore of the Ambracian Gulf, which is called 


Iv. | ACARNANIA. 159 


Xerékambo, from its want of water; for the brook 
is lost before it arrives there. It produces, how- 
ever, corn and Kalambokki, and belongs to the 
village of Kekhrenia, situated on the side of the 
steep rocky mountain which borders the ravine of 
Kekhreniatza to our left, and which separates it from 
the valley and lake of Valto or Amvrakia. We now 
quit the road to Xerdkambo, and turning to the 
left cross the ridge of Kekhrenia, passing about the 
middle of the ascent through that village, which 
contains thirty Greek families, some dwelling in 
good pyrghi. We left the brook at 8.18, halt ten 
minutes at Kekhrenia, and then, proceeding to 
climb its steep rocky ridge, arrive, at 9.40, at a 
church of St. Elias, on the summit which com- 
mands an extensive view of Xerdmero and Valto. 
These districts are little cultivated or inhabited, 
but particularly the latter, which consists of woody 
mountains to the northward, and to the southward 
of steep ridges inclosing a valley, the greatest part 
of which is lake or marsh, according to the season. 
It is this valley which gives name to the sub-dis- 
trict. 

Having descended the western side of the ridge, 
on foot, through a wood of oaks not growing very 
thickly nor of large size, we arrive, at 10.50, five 
minutes beyond the foot of the mountain on the 
edge of the lake; then turning the northern end 
of it ascend to Amvrakia, which is one-third of the 
way up a ridge parallel to the one we have passed, 
and equally steep and rocky. We arrive at 11.30. 
Sparto is another village on the same mountain, 
one hour northward of Amvrakia towards the sea. 

12 


160 ACARNANIA. | CHAP. 


Stanu is a third, of the same size as Amvrakia, and 
situated at the same height above the lake, three 
quarters of an hour to the southward. The part 
of the Valto, or lake, below Amvrakia, is a narrow 
shallow creek, about three miles long, branching 
out of the deeper part of it which is under Papa- 
lates and the monastery of Agrilid. - 

Amvrakia, or more vulgarly Amvrakia, contains 
about forty houses, and as many more in ruins. 
The Amvrakiotes, to avoid further decay, are 
about to move their situation higher up the moun- 
tain, where they will be less exposed to Turkish 
passengers, to thieves, and to the hostilities of 
some of their neighbours, which have caused a 
part of the vale, on the side of the lake, to be at 
length quite uncultivated. Their new village is 
to be called Plato, the position being level, though 
lofty, and already, my host the Proéstds, has 
spent, he tells me, twenty purses in building a 
house there. 

In the evening I descend the mountain of Am- 
vrakia, in 40 minutes, to its Skala, from whence 
are exported planks, velanidhi, grain, and cattle. 
It is called Kervasara', and is situated in a valley 
at the head of a long bay which forms the south- 
eastern extremity of the gulf of Arta. To the 
eastward of the valley rises the mountain named 
Spartovuni, a lower continuation of which extends 
to the entrance of the bay, and falls on the eastern 
side to Xerokambo. The latter valley terminates 


1 KepBacapde is derived such Turkish place of recep- 
from Karavanserai, though no tion is now to be found there. 


Iv. | ACARNANIA. 161 


at Armyré, where is a skala and shallow harbour, 
separated from the sea on the west by a low coast, 
which appears from Kervasara projecting to the 
left of the cape of Spartovani. To the westward 
of the bay of Kervasara rises the continuation of 
the ridge of Amvrakia, on which stands the vil- 
lage of Sparto, once perhaps situated on the oppo- 
site mountain which now bears that name, for, as 
we have seen in the instance of Amvrakia, villages 
have a locomotive faculty in this country. 

At the inner point of the bay, south-east of the 
magazines of Kervasara, are the walls of a large 
Hellenic town, occupying a height which rises 
from the right bank of a torrent, and reaches to 
the sea side. The place was fortified like Stratus, 
that is to say, there is no appearance of an Acro- 
polis of the usual kind, but the inclosed space was 
divided by a transverse wall into two parts, which 
are here more equal than at Stratus: many towers 
remain on the land-fronts. The masonry is of 
various ages; some parts are entirely polygonal, 
others consist of regular and equal courses. But 
the greater part of the work is of the third order, 
or of a kind between the two former. There are 
remains also of repairs with mortar, of a much 
later period. Doubtless the post has always been 
one of importance, as commanding the most 
easy and natural access ito Acarnania from 
Epirus, both by sea and land. The inclosed 
Space is overgrown with the kharub, oak, wild 
olive, and a great variety of shrubs, which often 
give shelter to deer, and other wild animals 
abounding in the adjacent woods. Beyond Xero- 

VOL, I. M 


162 ACARNANIA. [CIIAP. 


kambo is the plain of Vlikha, where at the foot 
of the mountains are the remains of a Hellenic 
city, described as being of larger compass than 
those at Kersavara, but not so well preserved. It 
is probably the ancient Argos of Amphilochia. 
Beyond the plain of Vlikha begins the Makrindro, 
a mountain covered with a forest of oaks, and 
falling steeply to the shore of the gulf. The road 
along its declivity, which is reckoned three hours 
in length, forms a pass resembling that of the 
Gates of Syria, at the head of the gulf of Skan- 
derin. Returning to Amvrakia, some παλαιὰ 
μνήματα occur on the road-side. They are ancient 
sepulchres of the most ordinary kind, or formed of 
four slabs set edgewise in the ground, and comgeed 
with other slabs. 

The existence of the name ᾿Αμβρακία attached 
to a modern village in this part of the country has 
a great tendency to confuse the ancient geography, 
as leading to the belief that the ruins at Kervasara 
are those of the ancient Ambracia. But Ambracia 
was certainly on the northern side of the gulf, at 
some distance from the sea. The fact is, that 
Amvrakia is a village of recent construction, to 
which the founders gave that name in consequence 
of a prevalent opinion, that the ruins at Kervasara 
are those of Ambracia. That the error is of long 
standing, we learn from Meletius, who himself fell 
into it, and who, having been Bishop of Arta, was 
probably the false luminary which led the foun- 
ders of Amvrakia to give their village that name. 
I have little doubt that the ruins at Kervasara are 
those of Limnea, from whence Philip began his 
march to Thermus. 


‘Iv. | ACARNANIA. 163 


June 19.—At 5 we begin to climb the steep 
rugged mountain at the back of Amvrakia. At 
5.40, arrive at the summit which forms the sepa- 
ration between Xeromero and Valto, and begin to 
descend. It is observable that this mountain, as 
well as the two parallel ranges, and the same may 
be said of many others in this part of Greece, are 
bare on the eastern side, and well clothed with 
trees on the western. As we descend, Katuna, a 
village of Xerdmero, pleasantly situated on a hill, 
with a cultivated valley below it, is on the left, 
and rather behind us: beyond it towards the sea, 
distant 10 or 12 miles, rises a high ridge, on 
which stands Zavitza, not in sight. To the right 
of Katana appears the bold rourd mountain called 
Bumisto, and more in front of us a lofty ridge 
with a peaked summit, named Varnaka, from a 
village on it towards the sea. On this side of it 
there is a fine vale, which extends to Katina, and 
is well cultivated with corn. Towards the Gulf 
of Arta appears a valley and a green marsh, over- 
grown with shrubs and timber trees. The moun- 
tain beyond it is covered with a thick forest. 
Having descended on foot through the wood, and 
arrived in the vale at 6.20, we leave, after a halt 
of ten minutes, the marsh to the left, and pass 
through a wood on the side of it. Cattle are 
feeding round it, and towards the southern end 
there are a few fields of wheat now falling under 
the sickle. At 7.20, near the head of the Bay of 
Lutraki, leaving to the right the road to the monas- 
tery of Kendrémata, and to Vlikha, Makrindro, 
and Arta, we ascend a height, and at 7.25 look 

M 2 


164 ACARNANIA, [ CHAP. 


down to the right, on the head of the Bay of 
Lutraki. The beach is covered with firewood, 
piled in stacks for embarkation; and farther on 
are some magazines, near which a polacca brig is 
at anchor, loading the wood. At 7.53 the road 
crosses a bridge over a torrent, which is shaded 
with planes, and bordered by slopes clothed with 
oaks and planes, festooned with wild vines, and 
where the khartb and the paliiri, covered with a 
profusion of blossoms, are mixed with the aromatic 
shrubs with which Greece so eminently abounds, 
and peopled with nightingales singing in the deep 
shade. After a halt of 12 minutes we pursue our 
route along the side of the forest of oak, which 
covers the mountain, with the gulf at a short dis- 
tance on the right, and then pass through a nar- 
row tract between the sea and the forest, where 
are a few fields of maize, watered by rivulets from 
the mountain. 

At 8.35 occurs a tjiftlik belonging to Aly Pasha, 
named Balim Bey, situated half a mile from the 
sea. Here the French consul, Lasalle, about the 
year 1788, embarked the greatest part of the 
timber which he cut down in the neighbouring 
mountain, for the use of the naval yard at Toulon. 
There still remain however some very large trees, 
the finest I have yet seen in Greece. Soon after- 
wards we enter the thickest part of the forest, 
leaving the village of Nisi half an hour to the 
right. The road to Lefkadha’ turns off to the 


1 Λευκάδα, that is Leucas in the usual Romaic form of the 
accusative case, 


Iv. | ACARNANIA. 165 


left about three quarters of an hour beyond Balim 
Bey. We lose our way in the wood, and are 40 
minutes in recovering it. At 10,15 having gained 
the summit of a ridge, which terminates in a cape 
called Gheladha', on the eastern side of the Bay 
of Vonitza, this town opens to view, and to the 
left of it the lake called Vulkaria, with a woody 
and marshy tract on this side of it, around which 
is a little cultivation. Here the oaks are generally 
small, but there is an abundance of fine trees 
towards Lefkadha, in which direction the moun- 
tain of Plaghia? intercepts the view to the Strait of 
Leucas, but admits a sight of the highest part of 
the island over it. The ridge to our left 1s con- 
tinued as far as the western coast near Zavérdha, 
and rises in that interval to a lofty summit named 
Pergandi. Exactly in the spot where this view 
opens are some Hellenic foundations by the road- 
side, and some others in a neighbouring corn-field. 

From hence to Vonitza the land is well cultivated 
with corn. Leaving on our right a monastery, 
beautifully situated below a grove of oaks on the 
side of the mountain, we descend into the plain, 
and crossing it diagonally, arrive at Vonitza® at 
12.10. In the entrance of the town are the re- 
mains of a square redoubt and detached ravelin, 
which are recent works of the French. 

The district of Vonitza extends 4 or 5 miles 
round the town, including the slopes of the moun- 


" Properly τῆς Γελάδας,--- FEpiscopatuum, written Bovr- 
_the Cape of the Cow. tira. The bishopric which is 
* Th ayede. now extinct was in the ἐπαρ- 


* Βόνιτζα. In the Notitiz χία of Naupactus. 


166 ACARNANTA. [CHAP. 


tains on the eastern and western sides of the 
valley, and the valley itself in the direction of the 
Lake Vulkaria, nearly as far as Konidhari; a 
tjiftlik belonging to Aly Pasha, whose property 
now extends as far as the channel of Lefkadha, 
though in consequence of its exposure to the rob- 
bers, who take refuge in the islands, he derives 
little profit from it. Konidhari stands on a low 
ridge which connects the heights on the west of 
Vonitza with Mount Pergandi, and thus separates 
the plain of Vonitza from the Lake Vulkaria, as 
well as from another plain which reaches to the 
Bay of Zavérdha. Beyond the ridge, at the 
eastern extremity of the Vulkaria, are some thick 
woods, the abode of deer and wild hogs, and often 
the retreat of the robbers in those expeditions 
from the islands which have almost depopulated 
Acarnania. 

The house in which I am lodged at Vonitza, that 
of the Greek primate Khalikidpulo, commonly 
called Logothéti, from his ecclesiastical office, 
stands on the shore, on the side of a strait about 
200 yards in width, which communicates from the 
Bay of Vonitza to the Liméni, a shallow harbour 
which widens to half a mile, and is about two 
miles long. 

Vo6nitza contains 450 houses, divided into three 
separate quarters : namely, Recinto, which lies on 
the south-west, and is so called as being inclosed 
within two walls which descend to the shore of 
the shallow harbour from the summit of a conical 
hill, crowned with a ruinous and ill-constructed 
Venetian castle; secondly, Borgo, which is a 


Iv. | ACARNANIA. 167 


suburb on the western side of the hill; and 
thirdly, Boccale, which is divided from Borgo by 
gardens, and stretches eastward along the shore 
of the Bay. The greater part of the houses of 
Vonitza are wretched cottages, constructed of mud 
and thatched. In Recinto are the ruins of a large 
church, having a Latin inscription over the door, 
placed there by the Venetians. A marshy tract 
extending towards the head of the liméni is oc- 
cupied by gardens, and several private houses in 
an unhealthy situation. Immediately opposite to 
M. Logothéti’s house, on the opposite or northern 
point of the harbour’s mouth, is a small suburb 
consisting of a few houses upon the extreme point, 
together with a monastery prettily situated among 
olive trees. Both the monastery and suburb are 
known by the name of Myrtari. 

Beyond Myrtari lies the great peninsula, formed 
by the Bay of Vonitza, the liméni of Vonitza, 
and the Gulf of Prévyza, and which terminates to 
the north-east in a high rocky point, separated 
from a similar cape by the strait which forms the 
entrance from the small ante-gulf of Prévyza into 
the main Gulf of Arta. The Bay of Vonitza is a 
very large semi-circular basin, opening into the 
gulf between the eastern side of the peninsula 
above-mentioned, and Cape Gheladha to the east- 
ward. It is indented with several beautiful har- 
bours, and has considerable depth quite to the 
shore of Vonitza. The commerce of this place 
consists chiefly in the exchange of grain, cattle, 
and firewood, for the articles of furniture and do- 
mestic use for which Greece is indebted to Europe, 


168 ACARNANIA. [ CHAP. 


or Constantinople. As to government, it is in 
the same condition with Prévyza and Parga. The 
treaty of 1800, which formed the Septinsular re- 
public, assigned these Venetian dependencies to 
the Porte, on the condition that they were to be 
governed by their own municipal laws, and to be 
exempt from the kharatj, but to pay the land tax 
and customs to an officer appointed by the Porte to 
receive them. The Aga charged with this office 
has a guard of five or six men. He complains 
much of his solitary situation, without a single 
Turk to speak to, even the soldiers of the garrison 
being Christians. ‘‘ But I serve,” he says, ‘‘ for 
the glory of my sovereign, and with the hopes of 
promotion.” In the meantime, he is in great 
dread of offending Aly Pasha, whose. design of 
obtaining complete possession of the Ex-Venetian 
places is sufficiently evident. The poor Aga has 
recently been much alarmed at the conduct of his 
principal at Prévyza, who has openly shown his 
suspicions of the Pasha by not waiting upon him 
when he was lately at Mytika, on the borders of 
the district of Prévyza. Nor is he free from ap- 
prehensions from the chief. Greeks at this place, 
whom he suspects of having been gained over by 
Aly to solicit his protection. Whatever may be 
the Pasha’s designs, the Turk is totally unable to 
prevent them, and will find it very difficult, there- 
fore, to avoid falling into disgrace with his own 
superiors. ‘‘If the Greeks of Vonitza,” he ob- 
serves, ‘‘ abandon me, and I am left alone to op- 
pose Aly’s wishes, | am certainly a lost man.” 
There seems to be too much reason for these fears, 


Iv. | ACARNANIA. 169 


for already those among the Greeks, who were in- 
clined to support him and his cause against Aly, 
have thought it prudent to quit the place; and the 
opposite party, convinced of the inutility of resist- 
ance, have joined the Vezir in some mercantile 
speculations, by which all the advantage they are 
likely to gain, is that of being the last devoured. 
His Highness derives great assistance in his designs 
from the robbers, who furnish him with a constant 
pretext for having a body of troops in the Ex- 
Venetian territories. Soon after the Turkish resi- 
dent’s visit, he sends me a present of a lamb and 
some lemons, and— 

June 20, this morning accompanies me to the 
castle which commands a fine view of the western 
part of the Ambracic Gulf, bounded by the hills of 
Suli and loannina. The castle has a double in- 
closure, a ruined church on the summit, a good 
cistern, and a house built by Aly Pasha for the 
Albanian garrison, which he placed here after he 
had taken Vonitza from the French, and when he 
probably expected to have been left in quiet posses- 
sion of it by the Porte. It is armed only with three 
small cannon on the southern side. The ruinous 
condition of the churches here, and in the Recinto, 
is said to have been caused by the Venetians hay- 
ing destroyed them to sell the materials when they 
evacuated the place. 

The advantages of Vonitza are its fine bay for 
ships, its harbour at Myrtari for small vessels, its 
forests abounding in excellent timber and pasture 
for cattle ; a fertile valley, an easy communication 
with Lefkadha, and a fortress in a position which 


170 ACARNANIA. [CHAP. 


commands the access into Acarnania and Atolia 
from Epirus by the way of Prévyza, and which 
would be of the greatest importance if the strong 
Pass of Makrinoro, the only entrance by land, 
were closed, and the water communication in the 
hands of the defenders of Acarnania. On the other 
hand, Vonitza, in common with the other places 
in the gulf, partakes of the imconvenience of the 
shallowness of the Strait of Prévyza, and which is 
the more sensibly felt as the exterior coast, for a 
great distance both to the north and south of the 
entrance, affords no secure anchorage. Dhémata, 
at the northern extremity of the Strait of Leucas, 
is the best ; but the entrance is commanded by the 
Castle of Santa Maura. Another disadvantage of 
Vonitza is its deficiency of fresh water, which is 
supplied by a canal derived from a stream at some 
distance in the valley; nor is the place exempt 
from malaria in the summer and autumn, caused 
by the stagnant waters at the head of the harbour, 
as well as by the land breezes which blow from the 
marshes near the Lake of Vulkaria. 

The land of Vonitza belongs chiefly to nobles of 
Zante, Cefalonia, and Corfu, who became possessed 
of it under the Venetian government, and whose 
cultivators send the proprietors a fourth of the pro- 
duce, being themselves subject to all the expences, 
including the land tax paid to the Porte. The 
Greeks of Vonitza have lately cleared tracts of land 
on the hills, which they are sowing on their own 
account. In the woods around, they are allowed 
to cut firewood and plank, but not for exportation, 
the woods being the property of the Sultan, and no 

12 


iv. | ACARNANIA. 171 


persons being allowed to fell large timber with- 
out permission from the Porte. 

In the plain, a mile and a half 8.E. of the 
town, and three quarters of a mile from the sea, 
rises a small conical height, called Μαρία, and 
behind it a similar one, but larger; both over- 
grown with bushes. On the summit of the smaller, 
a space of about three acres, now grown with corn, 
is surrounded by the remains of a Hellenic wall. 
On the northern side, the masonry is of the third 
order ; and on the east there is a beautiful specimen 
of the fourth, or most regular kind. There is said to 
be another small castle of the same kind at Ruga, 
an inlet of the coast a little on this side of Nisi. 
The latter was probably a maritime dependency of 
a larger place, of which there are remains at Aio 
Vasili, on the side of the mountain above it, three 
hours from Vonitza. I have searched in vain for 
any vestiges of antiquity in the Castle of Vonitza, 
or on any part of the hill, though the situation 
could hardly have been neglected by the ancients. 
In fact, ancient sepulchres are often found in the 
suburb of Boccale, and fragments in other places, 
sufficient to show that it was an ancient site. 

June 21.—This morning, at 5.10, having sent 
my baggage off at midnight in a boat, I proceed 
by land from Vonitza to Prévyza, follow the south- 
ern shore of the shallow harbour until 5.30, then 
leaving the direct road, which continues along the 
harbour at the foot of the mountain, turn to the 
left, and in eighteen minutes gain a summit which 
commands a fine view of the great Acarnanian 
peninsula, lying to the westward of the bays of 


172 ACARNANIA. [ CHAP. 


Vonitza and Zavérdha. To the eastward of the 
isthmus, which, with the exception of the small 
ridge of Konidhari, is a level from the one bay to 
the other, rises the parallel mountain, of which 
the summit is named Pergandi. The middle of 
the peninsula is composed of low land, surrounding 
the lagoon of Vulkaria, and extending to Prévyza, 
and to the coast between it and Aia Mavra. All 
the southern part of the peninsula consists of a 
lofty mountain, on the slope of which, opposite to 
Lefkadha, stands the village Plaghia, and at its 
southern extremity another named Bogonia. Op- 
posite to the latter, at the foot of the ridge of Per- 
gandi, is Zavérdha. Both these places are at no 
great distance from the bay, which is usually 
named after the latter. The intermediate plain, 
and indeed the whole isthmus, 15 fertile, but little 
cultivated. The peninsula is for the most part a 
forest, which, especially on the southern and eastern 
side of the lagoon, and on the mountain of Plaghia, 
abounds in large oaks well adapted to naval con- 
struction’. The lagoon, including the marshes 
on its edge, is four or five miles long, and as much 
broad. It communicates by a narrow stream with 
the head of Port Dhémata, on the southern side of 
which is the entrance of the canal of Lefkadha and 
the Castle of Aia Mavyra. 

At the south-eastern end of Vulkaria, on a 
height rismg amidst thick woods, is the Paleo- 


‘ In the woods near the have seen in Greece; though 
lagoon, I observed, in 1809, perhapsas they grow ina marsh, 
many very fine oaks, taller the timber may not be so good 
and straighter than any I as that of the hills. I remarked 


Iv. | ACARNANIA. 173 


kastro of Kekhropila, so called from a small 
village no longer inhabited. To the left of Ke- 
khroptla the view comprehends Meganisi, ’Atoko, 
and a part of Kalamo, the remainder of which is 
hid by the Acarnanian coast. To the northward 
are seen Paxu and the coast from Parga to Sala- 
ghora, with all the northern side of the Gulf of 
Arta. Though it is difficult with confidence to 
adapt the names to the ancient positions in this 
part of Acarnania, there can be little doubt that 
the Vulkaria is the ancient Myrtuntium, being 
precisely as Strabo describes Myrtuntium', “a 
λιμνοθάλαττα, (or salt-water lagoon,) situated be- 
tween Leucas and the Ambracic Gulf.” 

At 7.15, descending from the mountain, and 
leaving the extremity of the liméni of Voénitza on 
the right, as well as a road to ‘Aghios Petros, a 
harbour on the shore of the Gulf of Prévyza, 
where are some vestiges of a Hellenic polis, pro- 
bably Anactorium, we proceed through woods and 
bushes, and arrive, at 7.50, on the margin of a 
beautiful little fresh-water lake, named Linovré- 
khi’, on one side of which is a hanging forest 
of oaks. A peasant here describes to me a sub- 
terraneous stream which emerges from a cavity in 
the forest, near the Lake of Vulkaria. The road 
continues through an uncultivated country over- 


several stumps of the trees tisk. In some places the wood 
which had been cut down by consists entirely of ilex (dpe- 
Lasalle, and some trunks, αἱς), but the trees are not large. 
which, after having been cut * Strabo, p. 459. 

down, had not been removed. ? Λινοβρόχι, literally a pond 
There is a thick underwood of for soaking flax. 

bay, ilex, myrtle, paliuri, len- 


174 ACARNANIA. | CHAP. 


grown with thorns and shrubs, and at 8.40 
emerges on the beach of the Gulf of Prévyza, 
where lies some ship timber, principally knees, 
ready cut and prepared for an armed vessel which 
Aly Pasha is about to build at Salaghora. The 
builder calculates that it will pass the bar of Pré- 
vyza with the guns in, and have half a foot water 
to spare. 

After following the beach for half a mile, we 
cross a low point for the most part covered with 
myrtle, at the northern extremity of the Strait 
of Prévyza, and at 9.10 arrive at the Tyiftlik 
of Punta. Here are a few fields of maize sur- 
rounding a quadrangular building, with towers at 
the angles, which contains the dwellings of the 
peasants who cultivate the fields and tend the 
flocks on this farm of Aly. Here also is a kula, 
or modern tower, and several remains of ancient 
buildings of Roman construction. At a projection 
to the southward of the tjiftlik, where the Strait is 
narrowest, and immediately opposite to the castle 
of Prévyza, the Vezir has constructed a serai and 
small fortress. There is every probability that 
the Roman ruins are remains of some of the 
buildings of Actium, established by Augustus, for 
the breadth of the Strait answers perfectly to the 
‘‘ less than 5 stades” of Polybius, or the ‘“ some- 
thing more than four” of Strabo, or the ‘‘ four” of 
Scylax, or the ‘‘ 500 Roman paces” of Pliny’. 

Punta, it is to be observed, is the Italian trans- 


1 Polyb. 1. 4, c. 63. Stra- Kedoowro. . Plin. H.N. 1. 4, 
bo, p. 325. Scylax in Ὁ, 


IV. EPIRUS. 175 


lation of "Axpn, or” Axpov, which is the Greek name 
of this promontory, though in consequence of Pré- 
vyza having so long been a Venetian dependency, 
the word Punta is very commonly used by the 
Greeks themselves. But Akri, as well as Punta, 
is nothing more than the modern representative 
of ᾿Ακτὴ, a word descriptive, like Akri, of such a 
peninsula as that opposite to Prévyza, and from 
which the Apollo here worshipped was surnamed 
Actius, and his temple Actium. Besides the 
authors who have just been cited, we may refer to 
Thucydides and to Dio’, in proof of Akri being the 
site of Actium. Strabo alone has left an expres- 
sion which is not easily reconciled with actual 
appearances, in saying that the temple stood on 
a height. 

June 22.—Prévyza, or Prévesa’, for it is now 
written in both ways in Greek, though the latter 
form is probably Italian, contained 2,000 families, 
when the French arrived in 1798, but has now 
not more than 1200. When the Venetians took 
it in 1684, there are said to have been only 70 ; 
the rapid increase after that time is easily accounted 
for, by the commercial advantages of the position, 
and by the importance of this place, as well as of 
Parga and Vutzintro, to the safety of Corfa and its 
canal, which induced the Venetian government not 
only to protect the people against their Musulman 
neighbours, but to be vigilant in preventing their 
own proveditori and other officers from indulg- 


1 Thucyd. 1.1, ¢. 29. Dion. 2 Πρέβυζα, Πρέβεσα. 
Cass. l. 50, c. 12. 


176 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


ing in their accustomed rapacity. The houses 
are dispersed over a large space, each having 
a garden or small plot of ground attached to it, 
containing fig, walnut, and apricot trees, with 
a few culinary herbs. But the greater part of 
the dwellings are wretched huts, made of wat- 
tled branches plastered with mud. All the best 
houses, some of which, built in the Venetian 
style, show the former opulence of the place, are 
now in ruins. Prévyza is still, however, one of 
the best towns in Greece, and has an agreeable 
appearance, from the abundance of gardens, and 
from the olive plantations which cover the penin- 
sula beyond them. The low point on which the 
town stands enjoys the sea-breeze in summer in 
perfection, but the gulf wind at night, and early in 
the morning, is reckoned unwholesome ; that the 
situation, however, is not so, generally speaking, 
the robust constitution of the men, and the good 
complexion of the women sufficiently indicate, not- 
withstanding, that the latter, besides performing 
all the household drudgery, labour in the fields 
during the harvest of corn and olives, while the 
men are employed in the fisheries of the gulf, or 
in the trade and coasting navigation of Epirus, 
Acarnania, and the islands, or in smoking their 
pipes in idleness at home. One of the severest 
labours of the women is that of carrying large jars 
of water on their heads from the fountains, which 
being at the extremity of a very straggling town, 
are a mile distant from some parts of it. 

The water, which is excellent, rushes plentifully 
from the foot of a rocky cliff on the edge of the 


ιν. EPIRUS. 177 


sea beach. Wherever a channel is made in this 
place, a stream immediately issues, and it can 
hardly be doubted, that if the Prevyzans’ were to 
dig wells, they would find water every where. 
The principal source is fitted up in the Turkish 
style. 

Another employment of the women, but which 
is at once profitable and easy, is that of raising 
silkworms; they are now winding off the silk. 
The place produces annually 1500 pounds of raw 
sik, now sold at 10 piastres the pound. The 
grain of the territory, consisting of maize, wheat, 
barley, and oats, is about equal to the consumption 
of the place, sometimes insufficient, but sometimes 
so productive as to admit of the exchange of a 
portion of it for the wine of Lefkadha, or Thiaki. 
Of oil, which is of the best quality, superior even, 
according to the Prevyzans, to that of Corfu, 
or any other island, there is an annual average 
exportation of 10,000 tzukalia, or jars, of seven 
litres each, besides the consumption of the place : 
the present price is two dollars the jar. 

The Turkish Bey, or resident of the Sultan, re- 
ceives the tithe on land, which is let every year 
to the Greeks in lots, and the maritime customs, 
which are four per cent. on exports, and two per 
cent. on imports, as under the Venetians. The 
Bey commands a garrison of thirty-six soldiers, 
but takes all his directions for the management of 
the police from the Greek magistrates, who still 
preserve the Maggior Consiglio and other Vene- 

* οἱ Πρεβυζάνοι, or Πρεβυζαῖοι. 
VOL. I. N 


178 EPIRUS. [CHAP 


tian courts. The Consiglio consists of nobles, 
some of whom, as in the Seven Islands, may be 
found digging in their olive grounds. A body of 
forty of these elect the magistrates. Culprits are 
imprisoned on the requisition of the Proestdés, and 
are tried by the proper tribunal, which, as under 
the Venetians, admits of an appeal to the primary 
court, at either of the two other ex-Venetian towns, 
Parga and Vonitza. The Prevyzans express them- 
selves very grateful to Russia, whose consul takes 
care that no encroachments are made on these 
privileges, either by Aly Pasha or by the Bey. 
Hence, Prévyza at present is one of the happiest 
towns in Rumili, though with such ἃ neigh- 
bour as Aly there is no saying how long this 
condition may last. The territory extends only 
an hour's distance inland. Mytika', and. the fur- 
ther part of the ruins of Vicopols, are in Aly 
Pasha’s dominions: the: nearer: ruins, and the 
lagoon called Mazoma, belong to Prévyza. The 
situation in the entrance of this noble Gulf, sur- 
rounded by some of the most productive lands in 
Greece, at a point of ready communication with 
the islands and with Italy, would ensure to it some 
of those advantages which the same causes gave 
to its predecessor Nicopolis, if Greece were again 
to become a civilized country ; though perhaps not 
to the same degree, in consequence of the shallow 
channel, less suited to modern'than it was to ancient 
navigation. Nevertheless, it is probable that: in 


‘yy 


1 Νύτικα----80. called as standing on a cape; μύτη, nose, from 
the Hellenic μύω. 


Iv. | EPIRUS. 179 


every age Patrze and Nicopolis will prove the wis- 
dom of Augustus in selecting these two places 
for the Roman colonies of the western coast of 
Greece. 

The soil of the peninsula is excellent. Barley 
is sown in November, wheat in December, and 
oatsin January. Maize, as requiring plentiful irri- 
gation, which is not to be obtained here, some- 
times fails when the spring rains are not sufh- 
ciently abundant. It is generally grown among 
the plantations of young olives, is sown in April 
and reaped in August. The best oil is made 
from olives gathered by hand, though these do 
not yield half so much in quantity as the fruit 
which falls from the tree. It is not customary 
to sow under the full-grown olive-trees, which is 
common in many parts of Greece, oil being the 
most valuable production of Prévyza, and the 
opinion prevailing that the corn exhausts the 
soil and injures the crop of olives. Vines are sup- 
posed not to have the same effect, and are some- 
times planted among the trees. Where no tillage 
occurs the grass is fed short, and the ground 
about the roots is opened. In many parts of the 
peninsula the land is covered with fern, which 
grows here rather too luxuriantly. It is cut down 
and put into holes at the roots of the trees, where 
some think it beneficial as manure, and the ground 
is then ploughed. One of the reasons for this 
treatment is to obviate accidents from fire in the 
summer, when, the least spark among the dried 
vegetables, then abounding in uncultivated lands, 
creates a conflagration. Prévyza is said to have once 

Ν 2 


180 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


lost one-third of its trees in this manner; and a 
similar accident, though not so destructive, occurred 
when the Vezir’s Albanians were here. These 
troops, when en bivouac, are in the habit of light- 
ing fires, for the purpose, among others, va ψήσουν 
ταὶς φθείραις, that operation which is the Albanian 
substitute for washing the shirt. 

The hill of Mikhalitzi, at the foot of which are 
the ruins of Nicopolis, although now uncultivated 
on this side, bears the marks in its artificial 
terraces of a different state when it belonged 
to the monastery of Zalongo; the Vezir, having 
appropriated it to himself, has built a house 
and some labourers’ cottages on the summit of 
the hill. Huis farmers furnish seed, cattle, labour, 
and farming utensils, and deliver to him the 
tenth of the gross produce as miri, and a third 
of the remainder. In new tyjiftliks, or those which 
are of uncertain tenure, such as many of his 
were during the Suliote war, he was generally 
contented with a fourth of the produce. When to 
this obligation is added the kharatj, and the de- 
mands of Albanian troops, there seldom remains 
more for the peasant than is necessary to support 
life upon maize, salt fish, cheese, and garlic. 

The channel between Prévyza and Akri is not 
only shallow and narrow, but the entrance is ren- 
dered dangerous by a long sandy shoal, which 
projects southward from the cape of Prévyza, and 
leaves only a narrow passage of twelve feet in 
depth between it and another shoal on the Acar- 
nanian shore. ‘Towards the northern, or interior 
extremity of the strait, and immediately oppo- 


Iv. | EPIRUS. 181 


site to the town, the strait widens, and forms the 
harbour of Prévyza. Half a mile beyond the 
springs, at the northern extremity of the town, 
is Vathy, a small bay, where the water is as 
deep as in the harbour of Prévyza, and where 
an armed brig of the Vezir, formerly an English 
sloop, is now lying. A creek branches from Va- 
thy, which has a double termination ; the western 
branch touches a part of the site of Nicopolis, and 
the eastern approaches the coast of the Gulf of 
Arta. On the shore of Vathy are ruins of the 
magazines of Lasalle, which formed a quadrangle 
and had two stories ; the upper intended for grain, 
the lower for timber. In the inclosed court La- 
salle built vessels on his own account, besides which 
he had a contract to deliver at the arsenal of Tou- 
lon, for five franks the cubic foot, oak timber, to be 
marked in the woods by persons appointed by the 
French government. He bargained with the Greeks 
or Albanians to bring the trees down to the water- 
side: the ambassador at the Porte procured per- 
mission from the Sultan, and Aly was paid forty or 
fifty purses yearly to cover his own claims as 
Dervént Aga, or for the Spahilik, where it ex- 
isted. One year he extorted seventy purses from 
the French, on the pretence that he had received 
an order from the Porte to prevent the embarka- 
tion. Lasalle had the contract for five years, when 
it was renewed for five more; but at the end of 
two the French Revolution put an end to the con- 
tract, and an assassin to his life. The Suliotes 
brought a considerable quantity for him down the 
river of Luro. In the forest of Manina, in Acar- 


182 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


nania, the oaks are chiefly of the velani kind, 
which is seldom so large as the common oak, nor 
is the timber so good. Those of Makrinoro, Suli, 
and V6nitza, are the best in this part of Greece. 
Djumérka produces some fine firs. 

It is reckoned that near four hundred Prevyzan 
families gain a subsistence by the fisheries of their 
own town, or by those of Arta and Acarnania, 
which are now farmed from the Porte by. Aly 
Pasha. In the territory of Prévyza,' shell-fish, 
eels, and grey mullet, are caught—the two latter 
in the Mazoma, or lagoon of Nicopolis. ΟΥ̓ shell- 
fish there is an inexhaustible supply in the shallows: 
around the strait and near the town; a great quantity 
of these is sent to the islands in the time of Lent. 
Occasionally also an immense number of eels from 
the lagoons of Arta, suddenly make their appear- 
ance in the harbour of Prévyza. This happens 
always in tempestuous weather, and probably 
occurs only when in migrating to the sea from 
their breeding-places in the rivers: and lagoons of 
the Gulf, they meet with a storm in passing out of 
the strait, which drives them back upon Prévyza. 
The fisheries of Arta and Acarnania are conducted 
by the more opulent Prevyzans, who form socie- 
ties, each of which hires a share of the fishery, and 
employs Prevyzan labourers, for whom they find 
nets and other necessaries. While the sale of fish 
is going forward, the money is laid by in a com- 
mon purse, which, when the mukatesi has been 
paid, is equally divided between the merchants 
and the fishermen. This, and other modes of 
giving an interest in profits to all the individuals 

12 


Iv. | EPIRUS. 183 


employed in any speculation, are common in the 
mercantile and even in the agricultural undertakings 
of the Greeks. The greater part of the maritime 
commerce and carrying trade is managed upon 
the same principle; and it often happens that 
every sailor is in part owner of the ship as well 
as of the cargo. 

Such customs are at once an effect and a sup- 
port of the republican spirit which it is curious to 
find pervading a people subject to such a despot 
as the Sultan. In its origin it is to be attributed 
to the geographical construction of the country, na- 
turally dividing the people into communities, which 
have little dependence upon one another ; its pre- 
servation since the conquest may be attributed, in 
great measure, to the bigotry, and exclusiveness of 
the Turkish system, which, neither admits the 
Christians to the rights of the governing people, 
nor imterferes with the internal arrangements of 
the communities, unless by the effects of its uni- 
versal oppression. It cannot be denied, that the 
Greek method of conducting affairs stimulates 
mental and bodily exertion, but it promotes 
also that. undisciplined, intractable, envious, and 
contentious spirit, which is sure to break out 
whenever this people has sufficient liberty to dis- 
play it. 3 . 

Greek customs prevail at Prévyza in all their 
force, as in other places where by any accident 
the people enjoy a considerable degree of inde- 
pendence ; among others, they observe strictly the 
forbidden degrees in regard to marriage ;—cannot 
take a wife more than three times ;—the priests 


184 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


more than once. Cousins cannot marry nearer 
than the seventh degree, nor can the god-son be 
united to the daughter of his god-father. This is 
a part of the custom of Κουμπαρία, which gives an 
alliance equal to relationship by blood to two men 
of different families who have been sponsors to the 
same child at the baptismal font. The Greek word 
formed from the Italian compare, and originally 
from the Latin compater, shows the origin of the 
custom. It may be doubted whether it gives the 
Greeks any advantages against their great enemy 
the Turk, and rather seems to be a proof only of 
barbarism and insecurity, and both cause and 
effect of their spirit of hostility and rivalship. 

Mr. North’ gave five hundred piastres towards 
the establishment of a school, by means of which 
and other donations a small house was built at the 
gate of the principal church. It has since been 
converted into a court of justice; but there is a 
school in which writing is taught, with a sufficiency 
of ancient Greek to read the Testament. 

Many of the women of Suli have taken refuge 
at Prévyza, since the capture of their mountain by 
Aly, and are employed as servants. A Σουλιώτισσα, 
or Suliote girl, ten years of age, in the Vice-Con- 
sul’s family, has hired herself for twenty years, at 
the end of which she is to have one hundred and 
fifty piastres for a marriage portion. : 

Of the three other ex-Venetian places given up 
to the Porte, under conditions, by the treaty of 
1800, we have seen the state to which Vonitza is 


1 Afterwards Earl of Guildford. 


Iv. | EPIRUS. 185 


now reduced. Parga is protected from Aly at 
present by a resident agent of the Porte, under 
whom the people enjoy their old municipal govern- 
ment unchanged. Vutzintro is entirely in the 
hands of Aly. At the instigation of the Russians, 
the Porte has sent the Pasha repeated orders for 
its evacuation; but he avoids them, affecting to 
believe that the Russians mean to make use of the 
place for the purpose of their designs against him- 
self and the empire. He moreover alleges that he 
has purchased the farm of the fisheries from the 
Sultan for three years, and that he has not yet 
been paid his expenses in expelling the French. 
June 24.—Strabo, who wrote soon after the 
foundation of Nicopolis, has thus described it’: 
‘‘ Beyond port Glycys are two other harbours ; the 
first and smaller is Comarus, which at. Nicopolis 
the city founded by Augustus Cesar is separated 
by an isthmus of sixty stades from the Ambracic 
Gulf: the farther, and larger, and better port, is 
near the mouth of the gulf, about twelve stades 
distant from Nicopolis. * * * Augustus founded 
this place because he saw that the neighbouring 
cities were much depopulated’; and he gave it 


* Strabo, p. 824, 325. chicum, and Calydon. The 

* The cities which chiefly last is named by Pausanias, 
contributed to people Nicopo- _ the others in the following epi- 
lis were Ambracia, Thyrium, gram of Antipater : 
Anactorium, Argos Amphilo- 


Λευκάδος ἀντί pe Καῖσαρ id ᾿Αμβρακίης ἐριβώλου 
Θυῤῥείου τε πέλειν, ἀντί τ᾽ ᾿Ανακτορίου, 

᾽ > , \ αἱ (en 7 

Ἄργεος ᾿Αμφιλόχου τε καὶ ὅπποσα ῥαίσατο κύκλῳ 


᾿Αστε᾽ ἐπιθρώσκων δουριμανὴς πόλεμος, 


186 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


the name of Nicopolis in honour of the naval vic- 
tory which he gained before the mouth of the 
gulf over Antony and Cleopatra, who was herself 
present. A sacred inclosure’ for the use of the 
quinquennial contest has been constructed im the 
suburb’ in a grove’ containing a gymnasium and 
stadium ; there 1s another sanctuary on the sacred 
hill of Apollo, which rises above the grove: The 
Lacedemonians have the superintendence ἡ of the 
games which are named Actia, as being sacred to 
Apollo Actius, and which have been declared 
Olympian. All the surrounding towns are now 
subordinate to Nicopolis.” 

The ruins of Nicopolis are now called Paieopré- 
vyza. The road thither leads for two miles through 
the olive plantations and vineyards, which occupy 
all the south-western part of the peninsula of Pré- 
vyza, and for another mile over a shrubby uncul- 
tivated plain. The first ruins that occur are some 
small arched buildings of brick, probably sepul- 
chral; a little beyond which are the remains of a 
strong wall following the crest of a height which 
falls to the lagoon called Mazoma. The situation 
and direction of this wall, and the position of the 
sepulchres on the outside of it, seem to show that 
it was a part of the southern inclosure of the city. 
The Mazoma, which occupies about half the 


Eioaro Νικόπολιν θείην πόλιν, ἀντί τε νίκης 
Φοῖβος ἄναξ ταύτην δείκνυται ᾿Ακτιάδος. 


Antipatri Epigr. 33. Anthol. Jacobs. 


if 
* τέμενος. 3 ἄλσει. 


2 4 


’ ~ , , / 
ἐν TW προαστείῳ. ἐπιμελειαν. 


Iv. | EPIRUS. 


187 
_ breadth of the isthmus, is ee only from the 


Gulf of Arta by a narrow ῥάμμα, or thread of land, 
which is a mile long and one hundred yards si, 
and has two openings, where the fish are caught 


in ‘great numbers as they enter the lagoon in the 
winter, al 101 


and quit it in the summer. At the 
southern extremity of the narrow bank stands 
; 5) 


a tower, from whence, following the southern 


shore of the Mazoma, we arrive at a church of 
the ᾿Ανάληψις, or Ascension 


two or three hun- 
dred: yards beyond which are the ruins called the 
Paledkastro. 


ie a 


BR Ow, 


Mazoma 


lagoon 


*Analipsis 
Mi Nl 
MI) ” aes 


“- 


si i. 


y, My til 


ASS 


WS 
S 
=> 
tika 
ZB 
7 


Fue 


ΣΙ 


δι I 


δ 


Peninsula 


Τὼ 


wwe 


of 
Skatfidhaki 
rutin 

; 2, {0728 

. "CY. 
thy 


\ 


A 


δ 


at 





min 


Prévyza 


A. Paledkastro 


B. Theatre and Stadium 
C. Small theatre. 


1. 1. Springs of water 
2. Metropolis. 


Gulf of Prévyza 
3. Great gate. 
4. Palace. 


5. 5. Strong walls 
6. Bath. 


188 _ EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


This is an extensive inclosure of irregular form’, 
flanked with towers, and composed in great part 
of the materials of former ruins: courses of large 
squared blocks of stone, which seem to have be- 
longed to Hellenic walls, alternate with thick 
strata of Roman tiles cemented with an abundance 
of mortar. The western side of the inclosure is 
the most perfect, and here was the principal gate, 
situated near the south-western angle between two 
semi-circular towers. The other towers are quad- 
rangular. All of them internally have flights of 
steps supported upon arches, for the purpose of 
ascending to battlements on the summit of the 
walls. 

Although these works are lofty and solid, they 
do not resemble those of the Angustan age ; indeed 
the variety of marble fragments, and even remains 
of inscriptions, of the time of the Roman empire’, 
inserted in the masonry, prove the whole to have 
been a repair, though upon the exact site perhaps 
of the original citadel, and restored so as to form 
an inclosure sufficiently large for the diminished 
population of the place. It may not improbably 
be the work of Justinian, who, we know from Pro- 
copius, repaired Nicopolis*®. A cross over a small 
gate called ἡ πόρτα ᾿Αράβη seems cotemporary with 


1 IT cannot answer for the correctness of the shape as delineated 
in the sketch. 
? The following is one of the fragments : 
τῆ γλυκυτάτῃ μητρὶ Αἰλίᾳ "Ade . 
καὶ τῇ γλυκυτάτῃ θυγατρὶ Κλ 
> Procop. de. Aidif. 1, 4, ο. 1. 


PVs}: EPIRUS. 189 


the rest of the work. In the middle of the Paleé- 
kastro is a pool of fresh water now called Vaiéni’, 
which appears to have been covered with a large 
arched building. A rivulet issues from it, and is 
consumed in some adjacent gardens. - Not far from 
the spring to the north-west, a ruined building, 
called the Metropolis, is supposed to have been the 
episcopal church of the extinct see of Nicopolis. 
If so, it may be the oldest church in Greece, for 
the intention of St. Paul to winter here, expressed 
in his letter to Titus, would seem to indicate that 
he had a congregation at Nicopolis. Leaving the 
Paledkastro by the great gate, and proceeding in 
the direction of Mytika, where stands upon a cape 
of the western coast a small village of that name 
and a serai of the Vezir, the first remarkable object 
that occurs is a theatre, so overgrown with vegeta- 
tion in the lower part that it is not easily examined. 
It appears to be about 200 feet in diameter: 15 or 
20 rows of seats and the proscenium still remain. 
Being built on level ground, the back or highest 
part is entirely supported upon an arched corridor, 
18 feet high, and 8 feet 6 inches wide, lighted by 
openings in the wall which slope outwards, and 
supporting the entire superstructure, which con- 
tains the seats, formed of tiles and mortar. The 
building is now called the Skotini’, from its dark 
passages. The next ruins towards Mytika is 
named Bughi’, and seems to have been a palace, 
as it has numerous apartments with many niches 
in the walls for statues, and some remains of a 


* Βαγιένη. ? Σκοτινή. 5 Μπούγη. 


190 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


stone pavement. It stands just within an aqueduct 
supported upon arches, which enters the valley of 
Nicopolis on the western side of the bill of Mikha- 
litzi, and may be traced beyond the Skotini: in 
most parts the piers alone remain. Between the 
aqueduct and .Mytika are remains of a building 
similar to that within the aqueduct, but of a more 
regular plan, and of smaller dimensions. | 
On the side of the last falls of the hill of Mikha- 
litzi stands the greater theatre, sufficiently elevated 
above the other remains of Nicopolis to be a very 
conspicuous object. In approaching it from Bughi, 
the remains of a solid wall occur, resembling that 
above the Analipsis, and which seems, when com- 
plete, to have stretched across the isthmus from the 
north-western angle of the fortress. | Beyond it is 
a second source of water, which, with that in the 
Paledékastro, would seem to have been sufficient, by 
the aid of wells, for the supply of the city ; but here, 
as at Corinth, another Roman colony, where local 
springs are still more abundant, the colonists were 
not satisfied with the water, either because it lay 
too low, or did not suit their taste, and constructed 
an aqueduct thirty miles in length. Near the foun- 
tain are the ruins of a building called 
Kalpetzaki, of the annexed form, and 
probably a bath. It stands on the 
lowest and narrowest part of the 
ἔτη isthmus. A little above it are some 
other remains on the foot of Mount 
Mikhalitzi, from whence the stones of a pavement, 
and a statue of white marble, are said to have been 
transported lately to Prévyza. Both these and the 


Iv. | EPIRUS. 191 


baths belonged perhaps to the gymnasium; for the 
gymnasium, according to Strabo, was near the 
stadium!', and the remains of the stadium occur 
immediately above the last-mentioned ruin, in a 
north-eastern direction, having its eastern extrem- 
ity situated just below the south-western angle of 
the great theatre. 

The stadium, by the peasants called τὸ Καράβι, 
(the ship): is circular at both ends, unlike all the 
other stadia of Greece, but similar to several in 
Asia Minor, which have been constructed or re- 
paired by the Romans. The length of the course, 
however, seems to have been the same as in the 
other stadia of Greece, namely, 600 Greek feet ; 
for I measured 670 feet in the clear between the 
two curved extremities of the seats, which are now 
mere ruins overgrown with bushes. In winter the 
inclosed space is a pool of water. The ruins of 
the seats occupy a breadth of about 75 feet, but the 
total length of the construction was probably not 
more than 750 feet; underneath the seats are a 
range of arched chambers, intended apparently 
for no other purpose than to diminish the mass 
of masonry. 

The great: Slacintio was partly excavated in, the 
side of the hill; but all the superstructure, with 
the appurtenances of the scene, and a vomitory on 
either side of the stage, was constructed of large 
flat Roman bricks, united with a great quantity of 
mortar, and was faced with stone. Although the 
corridor above the cavea has fallen in, and the stone 


* Strabo, p. 325. 


192 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


seats have been removed, it is still one of the best 
preserved Roman theatres in existence, and well 
deserves to be accurately measured and delineated 
by an architect. The total diameter is about 300 
feet, but the earth, which has been washed from 
the superincumbent hill during the fourteen 
centuries which have elapsed since the decease 
of Pagan civilization, renders an exact measure- 
ment unattainable without excavation; in the 
present season a dense vegetation is a farther 
impediment, and, in particular, a forest of gigantic 
thistles, now in the full strength of their growth, 
mixed with other plants, which are equally trouble- 
some from being already pulverized by the heat, 
especially the Sfaka, or Verbascum, which at the 
least touch throws out a cloud of acrid dust. The 
scene had three doors and a large square apart- 
ment at either end, but the stone door-cases not 
having been spared any more than the seats of the 
cavea, the building is deprived of all its external 
decoration, and the inferiority of the Roman brick 
and mortar to the beauty and solidity of Greek 
masonry is shown in all its nakedness. The scene 
is 120 feet long, and 30 in depth. It was deco- 
rated with a range of statues of deities facing the 
cavea, as appears by some blocks below, on which 
are remains of the names of Venus and Minerva: 
A®PQ, —OHNAI. From the back of the theatre, 
the hill of Mikhalitzi rises steeply to the summit, 
which is about 500 feet above the theatre. 

As Strabo describes the sacred grove, stadium 
and gymnasium, to have been in the προάστειον, or 
suburb, it is probable that the wall to the south- 


Iv. | 


EPIRUS. 193 


ward of Kalpetzaki was a part of the inclosure of 
the city on the northern side. Of the two τεμένη, 
or sanctuaries, the ἄλσος, or sacred grove, in which 
the Actia were celebrated, is sufficiently identified 
by the theatre and stadium, the former for the use 
of the music, the latter for that of the gymnastic 
eontests. The second temenus, which was above 
the former, on the mountain of Apollo, is shown 
by Dio to have been exactly on the summit of the 
hill, where Mikhalitzi now stands. The historian 
relates that Octavianus, on arriving, previously to 
the battle of Actium, at the place’ where Nico- 
polis afterwards stood, encamped upon a height’, 
from whence he could see both the Ambracic Gulf 
and the outer sea towards Paxi, as well as the 
ports before Nicopolis; he not only fortified the 
camp, but built walls from it to the outer port, 
Comarus ; and after the battle, having surrounded 
the place where his tent was pitched * with squared 
stones, he adorned it with the beaks of the captured 
ships, and built within the inclosure a sanctuary 
of Apollo, open to the sky*. Such a view as Dio 
here describes, Augustus could not have obtained 
from the isthmus of Nicopolis, or from any 
spot in the immediate vicinity, except Mikhalitzi, 


* χωρίον. 

* ἐπὶ perewpov.—Dion. Cass. 
1, δ ον. 15; 

5 ἐν ᾧ ἐσκήνησε.---14.51, ς.1. 

* ἕδος τι ἐν αὐτῷ τοῦ ᾿Απόλ- 
λωνος ὑπαίθριον ἱδρυσάμενος. 

According to Suetonius, he 


ΟΕ, 


consecrated the place to Nep- 
tune and Mars: ‘ Ampliato 
vetere Apollinis templo locum 
castrorum quibus fuerit usus 
exormnatum navalibus_ spoliis 
Neptuno et Marti consecravit.”’ 
—Sueton. in Aug. 


194 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


from whence all the objects stated may be seen. 
The tent of Augustus therefore was placed on the 
summit of the mountain, his camp occupying the 
slope and the foot of the hill, from whence the 
communication with the port Comarus was pro- 
bably secured from interruption by μακρὰ τείχη, or 
parallel walls, which comprehended the harbour 
between their extremities. 

Although the words of Strabo, combined with the 
extant stadium, showthat it was at Nicopolis, and not 
at Actium, that the games called Actia were held 
during the long period of their celebration, there is 
reason to believe from Dio, that until the city was 
completed, and the buildings for the useof the games 
constructed, the meeting took place at Actium, where 
a στεφανίτης ἀγὼν, or contest for a crown, had long 
been instituted by the surrounding cities’. This 
ancient celebration was converted by Augustus, 
immediately after the victory, and at the same 
time that he enlarged the Temple of Apollo Ac- 
tius, into an exhibition of music and gymnastic 
rivalship, accompanied with horse-races, and was 
declared a sacred contest’; by which it was made 
equal in dignity to the four great games of Greece, 
and was accompanied by a sacrifice and festival, 
at which the hieronice were entertained at the 
public expence*. Dio expressly adds, that it was 
not until some time afterward that Nicopolis was 
colonized and completed, and that the hypeethrium 


' Strabo, p. 325. * Dion. Cass. 1. 51, Ὁ: 1. 


2 e \ > / 
ἱερὸς aywr. 


iv. | EPIRUS. 195 


was constructed on the site of the tent of Augustus. 
Here, besides other dedications, were placed the 
brazen statues of an ass and his driver, in com- 
memoration of a favourable omen, which had 
probably been prepared for the occasion on the 
morning of the battle’. On the foundation of 
Constantinople these statues were removed to the 
hippodrome of that city, where in 1204 they fell 
ito the hands of the barbarous Latins, who melted 
them with many other monuments of Grecian art 
still more valuable 5. 

It is remarkable that the wide bay lying between 
Mytika and Kastroskia is now called Gomaro ; 
Comarus, however, which Dio agrees with Strabo 
in showing to be the harbour of Nicopolis in the 
exterior sea *, was certainly not such a gulf as that 
to which the modern name is attached, but a port 
such as the ancients used, whence it was probably 
that of Mytika. The port which Strabo describes 


‘ Plutarch. in Anton. A  6pey ἐγγυτέρω καὶ ἐλάττων Ko- 


peasant driving an ass, met 
Octavianus as he came out of 
his tent at daybreak, and being 
asked his name, replied, “ Eu- 
tyches ;” and your ass’s name ? 
** Nicon.”’ 

? Nicet. ap. Banduri Imp. 
Orient. vol. i. p. 93. 


ὁ τὸν λιμένα τὸν ἔξω τὸν 


Κόμαρον. Dio. Cass. 1. 50, 
oad a A 
Μετὰ δὲ Τλυκὺν λιμένα 


ἐφεξῆς εἶσι δύο ἄλλοι λιμένες, 


4 \ ~ Cee 
μαρος ἰσθμὸν ποιῶν ἑξήκοντα 
σταδίων πρὸς τὸν ᾿Αμβρακικὸν 
κόλπον καὶ τὸ τοῦ Σεβάστου 
Καίσαρος κτίσμα τὴν Νικόπολιν" 
ε δὲ » ,, \ ! \ 
ὃ ὃὲ ἀπωτέρω καὶ μείζων καὶ 
ἀμείνων πλησίον τοῦ στόματος 
τοῦ κόλπου διέχων τῆς Νικοπό- 
λεως ὅσον δώδεκα σταδίους. 
3 ~ ~ 
Ἐφεξῆς δὲ τὸ στόμα τοῦ ᾿Αμ- 
βρακικοῦ κόλπου" τούτου δὲ τοῦ 
/ Χ \ , ~ ~ 
κόλπου TO μὲν στόμα μικρῷ τοῦ 
τετρασταδίου peilov.—Strabo, 
p. 324, 325. 


C5 


196 EPIRUS. , [CHAP. 


as the greater, would seem by the order of his 
text, to have been between Comarus and the strait 
of Prévyza, and consequently on the outside of the 
gulf; but the nature of the western coast of the 
Peninsula shows that he cannot have expressed 
himself accurately. It is evident from Dio, who dis- 
tinguishes Comarus as the outer port of Nicopolis, 
that the second harbour intended by Strabo was, 
within the gulf. Here, in fact, his distance of 
12 stades corresponds perfectly to Vathy, where 
some Roman ruins a little within and on the 
eastern shore of the creek, seem to indicate the 
exact situation of the λιμήν. These ruins consist of 
two square masses from 20 to 30 feet the side, with 
a third ruin, 48 feet in length, having a curved 
extremity. The walls are formed of strata of 
Roman tiles between masses of rough stones and 
mortar, and in some places subsist to the height 
of 12 or 15 feet. 

The breadth of 60 stades, which Strabo ascribes 
to the isthmus of Nicopolis, is obviously incorrect ; 
the broadest part of the site from the tower of the 
Mazoma to Mytika not being more than three miles. 
An opinion prevails at Prévyza, founded I believe on 
a supposed measurement by the French, when they 
entrenched the isthmus, that the shortest line from 
the Mazoma to the Gulf of Gémaro is no more 
than 800 opyuaic, or 4000 Greek feet. I cannot 
conceive, however, that it is less than 2000 yards 
in the narrowest part. After having measured 
the stadium, which is not exactly on the isthmus, 
it appeared to me, from a rising ground, that there 


Iv. | EPIRUS. 197 


is a distance equal to two stadia between the end of 
that monument and the Mazoma, four between 
the other end of the stadium and the aqueduct, 
and three more to the sea. 

The great quantity of fish taken by the Prevy- 
zans in the Mazoma, and neighbouring sea, illus- 
trates the remark of an anonymous geographer of 
the fourth century', who says that fish was so 
plentiful at Nicopolis as to be almost disgusting. 
Most of the other towns near the gulf having been 
abandoned, the Nicopolites probably had all the 
fisheries in their hands. 

Nicopolis was considered the capital of Southern 
Epirus and Acarnania during the three first centu- 
ries of the Roman Empire ; but before the close of 
this period, it had so far declined as to cease to 
strike its own money, of which there exist great 
numbers in copper, either autonomous? or of the 
emperors prior to Galerian. The coins of this 
prince and his wife Salonina are the latest. The 
ruin of paganism, by depriving the Actian games 
of their importance, was the first great blow in- 
flicted upon the prosperity of Nicopolis. Julian 
restored both its edifices and its games; but the 
effect was momentary, and the decline of the im- 
perial authority at sea having been followed by 
piracy, the inevitable consequence in the Grecian 
seas of the want of a controlling naval power, Nico- 
polis lost the maritime commerce which had been its 


* Ap. Geogr. Minor. vol.iii. consequence of Domitian’s 
* The Nicopolites were proud persecution of the philoso- 
of their freedom. Epictetus, phers—(Aul. Gell. 1. 15, ο. 11. 
who retired to Nicopolis in —Suidas in ’Emixrnrog)—men- 


198 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


main support. At the beginning of the fifth century, 
the Goths of Alaric retreating before Stilico in the 
Peloponnesus, spread desolation over Epirus, and 
soon afterwards the Huns of Totila ravaged this 
coast, on which occasion Nicopolis particularly 
suffered’. It was chiefly perhaps on these occa- 
sions that its buildings sustained the injuries which 
called for the repairs bestowed upon the city by 
Justinian. It continued to be the capital of 
southern Epirus, either as the chief town of a 
ducal province’, according to the arrangement of 
the earlier ages of the Byzantine Empire, or as 
that of a Theme in the tenth century *. Cedrenus 
relates, that in the eleventh century all the Theme 
of Nicopolis, except Naupactus, joined a revolt of 
the Bulgarians against the Emperor Michael the 
Paphlagonian, which had been caused by the 
extortion of his lieutenant, John Cutzomytes (wry- 
nose)*. The name of Nicopolis occurs also in 
the history of Venice, in reference to the trans- 
actions following the capture of Constantinople 
by the Franks in 1204: and from Nicetas we 
learn that the territory of Nicopolis® was a part 
of the dominions which then became the Des- 
potate of the West, under Michael Angelus Com- 


tions a saying of theirs: Νὴ ; 


ἐπαρχία ὑπὸ ἡγεμόνα.--- 
τὴν Καίσαρος τύχην ἐλεύθεροι Hierocl. p.651. Wessel. 
éopev.—Epict. ab Arrian. I. * Constantin. Porphyrog. de 
ΠΟ. Ἵ, Them. 

‘ Also  Anchiasmus (the * Cedren. p. 747. ed. Paris. 
Forty Saints.) Procop. de bello > τὰ τῇ Νικοπόλει προσοριζό- 
Goth. 1. 4, ο. 22. peva.—Nicet. Ann. Balduin. 


p. 460. Paris. 


IV. | EPIRUS. 199 


nenus. But the town had long been reduced 
to misery, if we may trust to ecclesiastical history, 
which, during the Byzantine empire, furnishes the 
best indication of the relative importance of places. 
Although Nicopolis was still a bishop’s see at the 
end of the ninth century, and had then been re- 
cently transferred from the patriarchy of Rome 
to that of Constantinople, the ravages of the Bul- 
garians, fifty years afterwards, put an end to the 
bishopric, the last prelate having then been re- 
moved to Ancyra in Asia'. Joannina, which was 
already a bishopric under the metropolitan of 
Naupactus then succeeded to Nicopolis as the 
seat of ecclesiastical authority in the south of 
Epirus, and was raised to the dignity of a me- 
tropolis in the thirteenth century ; about a cen- 
tury before which Arta became a bishopric of 
Naupactus. When the imperial name was no longer 
a protection to the distant subjects of the empire, 
it was natural that Ambracia and other ancient 
sites near the Gulf, which Nicopolis had depopu- 
lated under the first emperors of Rome, should 
again become preferable from the same motives of 
security which had caused them to be occupied by 
the early Greeks. The new town of Prévyza, 
built nearer to the Nicopolitan harbours than 
the ancient city, in a more defensible position, in 
a more fertile part of the plain, and where water 
was equally plentiful, then absorbed probably all 
the remaining inhabitants of the old city. 

June 25.—A north-westerly breeze carries me 


" Nicephor. Constant. 1. 14, ο. 39. 


200 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


this afternoon, in an hour and a half, to Sala- 
ghora', the port of Arta. Just beyond the strait 
which separates the Gulf of Prévyza from that of 
Arta, are two small islands : that to the left named 
Gaidharonisi, that to the right Kefal6’?. These, 
and the other islands in the Gulf, like all the de- 
sert grounds in Greece, are clothed with a luxuri- 
ant vegetation in the spring, when they furnish 
pasture for cattle. Between Gaidharonisi and the 
neighbouring cape of the peninsula of Skafidhaki, 
we found one of Aly Pasha’s gun-boats lying, 
a small vessel with two little guns in the bow. He 
has two or three of these in the Gulf, and at Sala- 
ghora a new brig corvette. When he lately visited 
Salaghéra he ordered the shrubs to be cleared 
away, and a town to be laid out; but only five or 
six magazines have been built, with a chamber for 
the collector of the customs at the foot of a rocky 
height which here projects from the northern shore 
of the Gulf. The hill seems formerly to have been 
an island, being almost surrounded by the sea to the 
south, where the depth of water is more than sufh- 
cient for any ship capable of crossing the bar of 


* Zadaywoa. times to his house at Vonitza. 


* In a subsequent journey I 
landed on Kefal6, which is op- 
posite to Vonitza, and found 
there the remains of a large 
building of the Lower Empire, 
probably a monastery, from 
which Mr. K., of VO6nitza, had 
removed an [onic capital and 
pilaster of the taste of those 


The same gentleman informed 
me that he had used the island, 
which is his property, for rais- 
ing poultry ; but was obliged 
to give up the practice from 
the difficulty of communicating 
with the island in the winter, 
on account of continued gales 
of wind. 


IV. | EPIRUS. 201 


Prévyza, and by shallow lagoons to the north, the 
connexion with the main land being by means of 
three narrow low banks branching from it to the east, 
the west, and the north : the two former of these are 
mere threads of land, such as generally separate 
lagoons from the sea ; the last is wider, but so low as 
often to be inundated ; a causeway, whicheven in this 
season is washed by the water of the lagoon, forms 
the only road into the plain of Arta. The summit 
of the hill of Salaghora commands an excellent 
view of the Gulf. In the rammata, which sepa- 
rate the lagoons from the sea, are seen the open- 
ings where the fish are caught, as at the Mazoma 
of Prévyza, and where are houses for the use of 
the fishery. The thread to the east joins at the 
end of three miles a woody peninsula projecting 
into the Gulf, on which is a metdkhi of the Pana- 
ghia, and off it three or four small islands con- 
nected together by mud-banks, and called the 
Korakonisia : midway to the Acarnanian shore, is 
Vuvala, the largest island in the Gulf. Beyond 
the peninsula of Panaghia the ramma is continued 
two or three miles farther eastward, to Palea- 
Bukka: so called from the belief that here was 
anciently the mouth of the river of Arta, now 
three miles to the eastward, which is not devoid of 
probability, as in almost every instance of an in- 
crease of land at the mouth of rivers, their lower 
course has assumed a new direction. Near the 
eastern side of the muddy and shallow bay of 
Palea-Bukka, is an island in the lagoon, covered 
with the ruins of a castle called Fidhékastro’ (Ser- 


1 Φιδό-καστρον. 


202 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


pent-castle), built of small stones and mortar, 
mixed with Hellenic work towards the founda- 
tions. The lagoon on the western side of Sala- 
ghéra, which extends to the river of Luro, is 
named Tzukalia, that to the eastward Logara. 

June 26.— Quitting Salaghdéra for Arta this 
morning at 5.45, we pass round the western end of 
the hill, and follow the causeway for half a mile 
across the lagoon; then enter upon the plain 
which, though now dry, is so marshy during the 
greater part of the year, as to be left uncultivated. 
But we soon arrive upon a somewhat higher level, 
where are a few fields of corn among desert tracts 
covered with camomile; pass through Anazi and 
Postikias, both villages belonging to Mukhtar 
Pasha, the latter at 7.35, and from thence pass 
through a continuance of tillage as far as Arta. 
At 8.15 we cross the river of Arta, which is here 
about 200 yards wide—deep, winding, and rapid— 
by a handsome bridge, said to have been built by 
one of the Paleologi. From thence, having tra- 
versed gardens and scattered houses, we pass close 
to the left of the ruined church of Parioritza, pro- 
perly Parigoritissa’, at 8.20, leave the castle of 
Arta on the right at 8.28, and at 8.30 arrive at the 
Metropolis’. The baggage was three hours and 
three quarters on the road. 

The bishop Ignatius receives me with great po- 


‘ Παρηγορίτισσα (Consola- house, both which are gene- 
trix), applied to the Panaghia. rally within a common inclo- 

* ἣ Μητρόπολις is the name sure. ἊἘπισκοπὴ is the word 
usually given in Greece to the applied to the church and 
episcopal church and bishop’s — house of a suffragan bishop. 


Iv. | EPIRUS. 203 


liteness ; he is a prelate of a most prepossessing 
person and address, well informed and sensible in 
his conversation, but spoiled by his situation, which, 
instead of allowing him to cultivate his mind, or to 
enjoy that civilized society of which he is naturally 
formed to be an ornament, places him in a perpe- 
tual state of fear for his own safety, and reduces 
him, against his inclination and conscience, to exe- 
cute the cruel orders of a selfish unprincipled tyrant. 
While another Greek is the Pasha’s agent for 
the management of the police and finances of the 
town and district of Arta, the bishop superintends 
the more important political concerns of all the 
surrounding country ; and when the Pasha has oc- 
casion to send a mission to the Septinsular republic 
or elsewhere, Ignatius is the person generally em- 
ployed. At Salaghora his signature was affixed 
to the tariff of imports in the custom-house. At 
home he assumes a considerable degree of oriental 
grandeur, more perhaps than any Musulman can 
venture upon in the Vezir’s dominions. Were it 
not for the absence of all arms, of which the Turks 
delight in making a display, and the plain monas- 
tic habit which is in contrast to the showy dresses 
of the Ottomans, the Metropolitan palace might be 
mistaken for the house of a rich Aga. 

The Vezir encourages these appearances of autho- 
rity in the Greek prelates, as it assists them in the 
exactions and political objects of which they are 
the instruments, without saving them from the oc- 
casional demands which none of his subjects, but 
especially the more opulent, ever escape. Thus cir- 
cumstanced, it is not very surprising that bishop 

12 


204 EPIRUS. | CHAP. 


Ignatius should be better acquainted with modern 
politics than with the ancient history and geography 
of Greece, upon which subjects he is satisfied with 
the opinions, often erroneous, received among his 
countrymen, who seldom give themselves the 
trouble of referring to the original sources of in- 
formation. Meletius, one of the predecessors of 
Ionatius in the see of Arta, whose judgment 
was not equal to his diligence and learning, has 
been a great cause of the prevalence and perma- 
nence of these errors, as the Greeks seldom or 
ever venture to dispute his authority. 

In the evening the ἄγιος ’Aprevoc, or Artinian 
Holy (such is the most polite mode of naming a 
bishop), accompanies me in a ride round the town. 
We proceed first to the church of Parigoritissa, a 
lofty building constructed chiefly of brick, nearly 
cubical on the outside, but within surrounded 
with vestibules and galleries, so as to leave in the 
middle a katholik6, which is more than twice as 
high as it is square at bottom, and is surmounted 
by a dome around which are six smaller domes over 
the aisles. -The following is an inscription in two 
lines round the semi-circular arch of the great 
door of the church in the inside!:— 


KAMINS KG AECTIONC xxxxKGITI0......., AOY KACBEC TOTHC kauire 
Κορ NOBAAGIOCAPTIE TIOA ....... MEFACKO MHNOCawKA 


The bishop states, that the church was built by 
the Comnenus Ducas here recorded, that his name 
1 The parts underlined only _ plaister, which has fallen away 


are on the original stone: the in the middle, where the dots 
remainder are on a coat of are. 


Iv. | EPIRUS. 205 


was Michael, and that in two MSS., one of which 
is preserved in Lefkadha, the other in the convent 
of Myrtari at Vonitza, he is entituled Despot of 
Arta, Count of Leucas, and Duke of Cephalonia 
and Zacynthus. He was probably the same Michael 
Angelus Comnenus who, under the title of Despot 
of Aitolia, or of Epirus, governed all Western 
Greece at the time of the Frank conquest of Con- 
stantinople in 1204, and who appears to have been 
the most powerful of the despots of the West. This 
would make the date of the building not long 
posterior to the time when Arta became a bishopric 
of the province of Naupactus. In the sixteenth 
century it was made a metropolis, and the see of 
Naupactus having been transferred hither, the pre- 
late received the title of Bishop of Naupactus and 
Arta, which he still retains. 

From Parigoritissa we ascended the height 
which commands Arta to the eastward, and re- 
turned to the Metropolis by the modern castle, 
visiting several remains of Hellenic antiquity in 
the way. Though not considerable, they are suffi- 
cient to show that Arta was the site of a very large 
Greek city. Towards the north and west it was 
half encompassed by the river which issues from 
an opening at no great distance to the north-east- 
ward between Mount Gelberini’, a high rocky 
summit, which rises in face of the town to the 
northward, and the hill of Peta, a village standing 
on the last falls of a range of mountains, which 
follows the left bank of the river of Arta almost to 


1 Κελπερήνη. 


206 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


its sources. Beyond Peta, southward, the hills 
border the plain of Arta as far as Makrinéro, which 
18 a continuation of them terminating abruptly in 


the gulf. 


es sit 


SS ων Mosque & Suburb of 
ΞΕΣ -" Marati 
iy, res Ig 

7 PAW SZ 

iv di Mh ml Cc 


-..“----- 
΄ 










΄ 
΄ 
΄ 





fa Ly 
ill μὴ 
Oo? i δὰ 
"7 


Z 


My 


Mh 
Ξ 


= haiti My 


4, 


AN 


SE 


5 
- Ξ rrhanthe yp ᾿ Ὁ πε] ὃ 








Ι 


\ 
\ 





ΞΞΞΞΞ A 
Wy == 7! ΞΞ Viakhérina 
\ V2 ΞΞΞΞΞ: MN μη, oa S \ 7 Monastex 
satin Zo Sones WA 
G, ἐς ΞΘΩΟνΨνἝΐ 
ἬΝ, ee 
“a, 63 


1. The Metropolis. 2. Church of Parigoritissa. 8. Ruined 
windmill. 4. Monastery of Fanaroméni. 5. Modern castle. 
6. Church of Odhighitria. 7. Ancient Acropolis. 8. Hill 
commanding that of the ancient Acropolis. 


*.* The dotted line shows the ancient walls where the foun- 


dations only remain. The entire line, where the remains are 
more considerable. 


The height on the eastern side of the town is the 
extremity of a long rocky hill, which is embraced 
by the river on its northern and western sides, and 
falls to the plain on the two others. Some founda- 
tions of an Acropolis are traceable on the summit, 


Iv. | EPIRUS. 207 


from whence the town wall descended in a northerly 
direction, so as to exclude a monastery dedicated 
to ‘the Virgin brought to light',’ and from thence 
to a projection of the height which here overhangs 
the river. It then followed a direction parallel to 
the river towards the modern castle, where in one 
place the Hellenic wall forms part of some cottages, 
otherwise of the slightest and rudest construction, 
and which remind me of the Egyptian huts stand- 
ing on the ruins of Luxor or Edfu. Beyond these 
the ancient wall is again seen in the lower part of 
the structure of the castle towards the river, and 
here it is most remarkable, consisting of courses 
nearly regular, and not less remarkable for the 
close and finished junction of the stones, than 
for their magnitude. These are in general qua- 
drangular, but some are sloping at one end; the 
two or three lowest courses which are narrower 
than the others, and project beyond the rest of the 
wall, as often occurs in Hellenic masonry of the 
best times, are founded on the excavated rock. 
One of the stones, which rest on the uppermost 
narrow course, is 16 feet long and 4 high ; another 
is 12 feet by 6. A little beyond the castle occurs 
the excavated foundation of another enormous wall 
parallel to the former, and indicating apparently, 
that the modern fortress occupies the site of a 
second ancient citadel. The town wall may again 
be seen supporting the terrace of the bishop’s 
garden overhanging the river, beyond which some 
smaller vestiges may be traced as far as the church 


‘ Παναγία φανερωμένη. 


208 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


of Parigoritissa, beyond which, at the foot of 
the hill behind the church of Odhighitria', the 
foundations are again visible ascending the hill 
directly to the acropolis. Squared blocks formerly 
belonging to the walls or public buildings of the 
city, are to be seen in every part of the modern 
town, where they are often used as benches, steps, 
or mounting blocks at the doors of the houses. 

The traces of power and opulence evident in these 
remains, seem scarcely to leave a question that 
Arta stands on the site of Ambracia, though neither 
bishop Ignatius assents to this opinion, nor his 
physician, Dr. M., of Katina, a learned and well- 
informed man. But the presumption derived from 
the existing vestiges, from the fertile and extensive 
plain, and from the strong and central situation of 
Arta, which have made it the chief town of the 
surrounding parts of Western Greece, causing it to 
give name to the Gulf, like Ambracia of old, is 
fully confirmed by other coincidences derived from 
the ancient authors. From a comparison of their 
testimony, we learn that Ambracia was situated 
eighty stades from the sea, in the middle of the 
northern side of the Gulf, on the eastern bank of 
the Arethus, otherwise called Arachthus or Arethon, 
which rose in Athamania, and in the same moun- 
tains which give rise tothe Peneius*. There is no 


1 Παναγία ὁδηγήτρια, or the 
conductress. 

* Strabo, p. 325, 327. Scy- 
lax, in’ApPpaxia ; Diczearch. 
v. 24; Lycophr. v. 409; Cal- 
limach. ap. Tzetz. in eod. ; 


Polyb. 1. 22, c. 9; Liv. 1. 38, 
c. 4. 

The words ὀλίγων σταδίων, 
and ὑπέρκειται τοῦ μυχοῦ pu- 
κρὸν, by which Strabo describes 
the distance of Ambracia from 


TV. | EPIRUS. 209 
other river, nor any other position near the Am- 
bracic Gulf, that will correspond to these requi- 
sites. | 

Livy, in the narrative which he has borrowed 
from Polybius, of the siege of Ambracia by the 
Romans under the consul Fulvius, in the summer 
of the year B.C. 189, informs us that the city of 
Ambracia was more than three miles in circum- 
ference ; that it stood on the western side of a 
rugged hill called Perrhanthe, one of the summits 
of which was occupied by the citadel; and that it 
was well protected by the river and heights, and 
by the wall which surrounded it’. These par- 
ticulars are exactly justified by the existing re- 
mains. 

As the siege by Fulvius is the most remarkable 
event. concerning Ambracia which occurs in his- 
tory, and as it refers both to the topography of the 
place itself and to the geography of the surround- 
ing country, I shall subjoin the principal circum- 


“the sea, does not quite accord 
with the eighty stades of Di- 
ceearchus and Scylax; but the 
agreement of these two au- 
thors, and the circumstance of 
the number in Diczearchus be- 
ing in verse, leave no doubt 
that eighty was the distance. 
It is one of those instances of 
a want of precision, so little 
adapted to geography, which 
are too common in Strabo. 

* Ambracia tumulo aspero 
subjecta est, Perrhanthem in- 


ΘΕ ¥. 


| 


cole vocant: urbs, qua murus 
vergit in campos et flumen, 
occidentem, arx quz imposita 
est tumulo orientem spectat : 
amnis Aretho, ex Athamania ᾿ 
fluens cadit in sinum maris, — 
ab nomine propinque urbis, 
Ambracium adpellatum ; pre- 
terquam quod hinc amnis mu- 
nit hinc tumuli, muro quoque 
firmo septa erat, patente in 
circuitu paullo amplius tria 
millia passuum.—Liv. 1. 38, 
6. 4. 


210 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


stances of it. From the reign of Pyrrhus, Am- 
bracia had been the capital of Epirus and the 
royal residence’; but at the time of the siege it 
was in the hands of the Atolians, and had been a 
main cause of the extent of the tolian power at that 
period of Grecian history, by giving them either a 
direct authority or a strong influence over the 
neighbouring states of Amphilochia, Aperantia, 
Athamania, and Dolopia, which last confined on 
other acquisitions of the Atolians in Phthiotis and 
the country of the Ainianes. As soon as they 
found themselves unable to save Ambracia, they 
submitted to the Roman power, and never reco- 
vered their former importance. Fulvius, who had 
landed at Apollonia, and had marched through 
Epirus, first established two fortified camps at a 
moderate distance from each other im the plain, 
and built a castle on a height near the citadel. 
His Epirote allies were encamped in the plain on 
the opposite side of the river. Before the consul 
could unite his three works together by means of 
an entrenchment, Eupolemus, with one thousand 
/Etolians, made his way into the city. As soon as 
the circumvallation was complete, and the ma- 
chines prepared for assailing the walls, the Romans 
began to batter them in five places: three of these, 
at two equal intervals, were in the plain over- 
against the Pyrrheium; a fourth was near the 
temple of A‘sculapius, and the fifth was at the 
citadel. The walls were so strong as to resist 
even beyond the expectation of the besieged ; 


1 Strabo, p. 325. Polyb. 1. 22; ¢. 9. Liv. I. θυ c: 9. 


Iv. | EPIRUS. 211 


giving them time to make sorties by night and 
day, and enabling them to counteract the effects 
of the battering machines of the enemy, either by 
means of engines or of fire. 

While these operations were im progress, a 
second body of AXtolians, amounting to five hun- 
dred, partly by force and partly under cover of a 
tempestuous night, entered the place, and imme- 
diately joined Eupolemus in assaulting the Roman 
lines, in which attempt it had been concerted that 
they were to be assisted by a simultaneous attack 
from without by Nicander, the pretor of A‘tolia. 
Nicander, however, found a cause or an apology for 
inaction in the arrival of Perseus in Amphilochia, 
who had been sent by his father Philip to recover 
that country and Dolopia from the AStolians. The 
double consequence was, that the sortie from Am- 
bracia failed, and that Perseus retired from his 
attack of Argos on the approach of Nicander, and 
returned into Macedonia, contenting himself with 
the spoliation of Amphilochia and Dolopia. No 
sooner had this obstacle been removed, than a 
new diversion occurred to prevent the pretor 
from attempting to raise the siege of Ambracia. 
Pleuratus, king of Illyria, having arrived with 
sixty ships in the Corinthiac Gulf, made from 
thence desultory incursions on the AEtolian coast, 
which required the attention of Nicander and his 
army. Meantime the siege proceeded vigorously 
on both sides. The wall was breached and re- 
trenched ; a mine was formed and countermined, 
and the parties fought in the subterraneous pas- 
sages, until the besiegers were driven out by the 

Pp 2 


212 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


missiles of their adversaries, or by the smoke of 
burnt feathers. Affairs were in this state when 
deputies arrived to solicit peace on the part of the 
/Ktolian council, who were urged to this measure 
by the defeat of Antiochus in Asia, by their con- 
scious inability of resisting three such enemies as 
Philip, Pleuratus, and the Romans, and probably 
by the conviction that the Ambraciote and their 
friend Amynander, king of Athamania, were only 
waiting for an opportunity to withdraw from their 
forced alliance with /Aitolia. The principal condi- 
tions were, that the /Etolians should pay five hun- 
dred Euboic talents to Rome, and should cease to 
claim any authority over the cities which had been 
taken by or allied with the Romans since the arrival 
of T. Quinctius in Greece. The people of Ambra- 
cia presented Fulvius with a golden crown of one 
hundred and fifty pounds weight; but this present 
did not save the city from being despoiled of all the 
statues of brass and marble, with which, as having 
been the royal residence of Epirus, it was adorned 
beyond all the cities of Western Greece. In the 
triumph of Fulvius two years afterwards, on his 
return from his proconsulship, two hundred and 
eighty-five statues of brass, and two hundred and 
thirty of marble, were exhibited in the procession, 
the greater part of which had been brought from 
Ambracia, /Etolia, and Cephallenia. 

The triple assault of the walls seems evidently 
to have been from the side of the modern gardens, 
that being the only part of the circuit where the 
walls were contiguous to the plain. The Pyr- 
rheinm, consequently, which I take to have been 


Iv. | EPIRUS. 213 


a fortified palace built by Pyrrhus, was in the ad- 
jacent part of the modern town, and probably near 
the river, comprehending the beautiful terrace now 
occupied by the metropolis. The situation of the 
monastery of Fanaroméni seems to have been an 
advantageous point for one of the battering ma- 
chines of the Consul, and may therefore be the 
site of the temple of A‘sculapius. The castle which 
_ Fulvius built on a height overagainst the citadel’, 
we can hardly doubt to have been on the hill of 
St. Elias, which is separated only by a hollow 
from that of the Acropolis; for the occupation of 
that height was obviously necessary to the safety 
of his line of circumvallation. The position of his 
work for battering the Acropolis was of course 
immediately opposite to the hill of St. Elias, on 
the crest of that of the citadel, and close to the 
wall. 

Dicearchus informs us that Ambracia was noted 
for a temple dedicated to Minerva, which may 
have been converted into one of the ancient 
churches now existing, such having often been 
the use made of the pagan temples. 

The other situations in the Ambracian territory 
which history has noticed are: 1. Ambracus, which 
was captured by Philip, son of Demetrius, in the 
year B.C. 219, after a siege of forty days, undertaken 
at the instigation of the Epirotes, who hoped that 
it would lead to the recovery of Ambracia from the 
‘Ktolians*. 2. The port of Ambracia, near which 


* Castellum loco edito contra arcem. 
? Polyb. 1. 4, ὃ. 61. 


214 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


there was a-fortress'. 3. Craneia, which a com- 
parison of Pliny and Stephanus shows to have 
been a subordinate place of the Ambracia, on a 
mountain of the same name’. 

Ambracus is described by Polybius as a place, 
in the territory of Ambracia, well fortified with 
ramparts and outworks, and as surrounded by 
marshes, through which there was only one narrow 
causeway leading to it*. This description accords 
so well with Fidhdkastro, that little doubt can re- 
main of the identity. If Ambracus was the same 
as the τεῖχος, or fortress near the port of Ambracia, 
mentioned by Scylax, of which the probability is very 
great, we may conclude that the harbour, which, 
according to the same author and Dicearchus‘*, 
was a κλειστὸς λιμὴν, or port closed with moles, 
leaving a narrow entrance which might be shut 
with a chain, was an artificial basin, excavated 
near the fortress, and opening towards the mouth 
of the river, which appears anciently to have dis- 
charged itself very near to Fidhdékastro. Craneia 
I conceive to have been the high mountain now 


marus, in Ambracié Crania, in 
Acarnania Aracynthus.—Plin. 


1 Ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἐπὶ θαλάττης 


τεῖχος καὶ λιμὴν κάλλιστος ( lege 


k\evoT6c).—Scylax, in ᾽᾿Αμβρα- 
κία. 

2 Κράνεια, χωρίον ᾿Αμβρα- 
κιωτῶν, Θεόπομπος πεντηκοστῷ 
πρώτῳ.---ϑίθρμαῃ. in Κράνεια. 

Montes clari in Dodone To- 


H. .N. 1.4, c 2. 
" καὶ προτειχίσμασι καὶ τεί- 

χει. κεῖται δ᾽ ἐν λίμναις μίαν 

ἀπὸ τῆς χώρας στενὴν καὶ χωσ- 
Ἀ ν᾽, , 

τὴν ἔχων πρόσοδον. --- Polyb. 

ubi sup. 


* Τῆς “EdAadog ἐστὶν ᾿Αμβρακία πρώτη πόλις" 
Αὐτὴ δ᾽ ἀποικία λέγεται τῶν Κορινθίων 


Εἶναι" κατὰ τὸν κόλπον δὲ τὸν καλούμενον 


Iv. | EPIRUS. 215 


called Kelberini, which rises from the right bank 
of the river of Arta, immediately opposite to the 
town, and which is exactly of the rugged nature 
described by the ancient name. Whether this 
was the same as the Sacred Mountain mentioned 
by Diczarchus', or whether the ridge on which 
Ambracia stood, and which Livy calls Perrhanthe, 
bore that name, cannot be asserted; but these 
being the only heights near Ambracia, the words 
of Dicearchus seem applicable only to the one 
or other of them. 

The poetical topographer just named differs 
from Scylax’, in interposing the Oreite between 
the Ambracian coast and that of the Amphilochi, 
and thus identifies the country of the Oreite with 
Makrinéro; for as Polybius and Livy agree in 


᾿Αμβρακικὸν ᾧκισται μέση, σταδίους δ᾽ ἔχει 
᾿Απὸ τῆς θαλάσσης ὀγδοήκοντ᾽" ἐπιφανὲς 
A’ ἱερὸν ᾿Αθηνᾶς ἐστ᾽ ἐν αὐτῇ, καὶ λιμὴν 
Κλειστός" καλεῖται Δρνοπὶς ἡ χώρα δ᾽ ὅλη. 
Diczarch. ν. 24. 


- 


Am’ ᾿Αμβρακίας εἰς Θετταλίαν τριῶν ὁδὸς 
Ἔσθ᾽ ἡμερῶν" ἔχει δὲ ποταμὸν λεγόμενον 
ἤΑραχθον εἰς θάλασσαν ἐξιόντα καὶ 
Ὄ , e \ δ᾽ ? ΄, 
ρος πρόσεστιν ἱερὸν δ᾽ ἐπικεκλημένον. 
Σταδίων δ᾽ ὁ παράπλους ἐστὶν ἑκατὸν εἴκοσι. 
Eira μετὰ τοῦτόν εἰσιν ᾿Ορεῖται λεγόμενοι, 
ΩΣ , μ᾿ 5.8. τὺ (να αἱ ἢ \ 
Εἶτ᾽ ᾿Αμφίλοχοι" ἤΑργος δ᾽ ἐνταῦθά ἐστι τὸ 
᾿Αμφιλοχικόν" μετὰ τούτους δ᾽ ᾿Ακαρνᾶνες. 
Diczarch. v. 40. 


* Παράπλους δὲ τῆς ᾿Αμβρα- καὶ πρώτη πόλις αὐτόθι ἤΑργος 
κίας στάδια px. Μετὰ δὲ ᾿Αμ- τὸ ’Apgidroyexdv.—Scylax, in 
βρακίαν ᾿Ακαρνανία ἔθνος ἐστί. ᾿Αμβρακία, ᾿Δκαρνανία. 


216 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


placing Argos Amphilochicum at 22 miles from 
Ambracia, it is evident that the country at the 
head of the gulf, immediately beyond Makrinoro, 
was the Amphilochia. The Oreitz therefore seem 
to have been the inhabitants of that remarkable 
mountain, and probably of its northerly continuation 
also, as far as it bordered on the Ambracian territory. 

As the foundation of Nicopolis was the term of 
the existence of Ambracia, it was to be expected 
that the site of Arta should be deficient, as we 
find it in those remains of the time of the Roman 
empire, which so constantly meet and sometimes 
disappoint the traveller when in search of earlier 
monuments in Asia, Africa, and many of the cities 
of Greece. Whatever may be found at Arta will 
probably be of the best times of Greece, as Am- 
bracia, after having been plundered by Fulvius, 
shared the fate of the other cities of Epirus, 22 
years afterwards, when the Senate of Rome, to 
gratify their army, which had been disappointed 
of the plunder of Macedonia, gave directions 
for that atrocious act of deliberate cruelty and 
perfidy, too well attested by the cotemporary 
historian, which consigned 70 cities of Epirus 
to plunder and destruction, and 150,000 Epi- 
rotes to be sold as slaves'. Hence the wretched 


* Polyb. ap. Strabon. p. 322. 
Liv. 1. 45, ¢. 84. Plutarch. 
in Aimil. Livy and Strabo, 


soldier 200. Plutarch, though 
he agrees in the number of 
cities taken, and Epirotes en- 


copying from Polybius, state 
the share of plunder to each 
Roman horseman to have been 
400 denaril,. and to each foot- 


slaved, asserts that the prize- 
money amounted only to 11 
drachmee each. 


Iv. | EPIRUS. 217 


state into which Ambracia fell, in common with 
the other cities occupying the naturally favoured 
districts around this beautiful inland sea, and 
which reduced them all to so small a population, 
that they sufficed only, even with the aid of a 
Roman colony, to furnish inhabitants for the 
single town of Nicopolis. To the abandonment of 
the site of Ambracia we may attribute, as in the 
instance of Sparta and a few other leading cities, 
the loss of the ancient name ; for it has rarely hap- 
pened where the positions have been continually 
inhabited, that the name has not been preserved. 
When strength of situation became again an im- 
portant requisite, Ambracia was re-occupied, as 
well as two other Hellenic sites at Vonitza and 
Rogis, while such as Sparta, Megalopolis, and 
other places little defended by nature, have re- 
mained desolate. The new name seems to have 
been taken from that of the river ἤάραιθος, or 
“Apayoc, which was the more easily contracted 
into two syllables as the accent was on the first. 
The monasteries and churches, Vlakhérina, Fana- 
roméni, Parigoritissa, Saint Theddhora, and Pan- 
dokratora, show the importance of the renewed city 
under the Byzantine emperors. 


CHAPTER V. 
EPIRUS. 


Route from Arta to Io4nnina—Marati—Khanopulo—Strivina— 
Kometzadhes — Koliadhes —Muliana —Pendepigadhia —Var- 
lam—Mount Olytzika—Pesta—Ai Dhimitri—Ioannina—De- 
parture for Suli—Rapsista—Variadhes—Tervitziana—River 
Lakiotiko—Romanates—Suli— Kughni—Kukia—Ai Dhona- 
to—Samoniva—Kiafa—Bira or Trypa—The Hill of Lightning 
—Mountain of Tzikurates—Klisira—River Acheron—Fanari 
—Glyky—Wars of the Suliotes— Departure from Kiafa— 
Avariko—Seritziana—Zermi—Zerlia—Arasso—Kutzanopulo 
—Kamarina—Zalongo—Ruins of Cassope—Luro—Kantza— 
Lélovo—River of St. George—Aqueduct of Nicopolis—St. 
George—K oliadhes—Pendepigadhia—Return to Ioannina. 


June 27.—This afternoon, at 6, having re-crossed 
the bridge of Arta, we follow the right bank of the 
river to Marati, a suburb standing just opposite to 
the metropolis of Arta, and consisting of a Turkish 
mosque with some houses and gardens. The Turk 
who built the mosque adorned it with several - 
columns from the church of Parigoritissa, where 
the loss has been very clumsily repaired. The 
gardens of Marati abound in filbert trees, the fruit 
of which forms one of the exports of Arta. Among 
the gardens is a ruin with walls and towers, ap- 
parently of the early times of Arta, forming a 
square of 36 yards; it is now called τὸ Καστέλι. 
Beyond Marati we cross the plain, leaving a marsh 


CHAP. Vv. | EPIRUS. 219 


on the left hand, and having arrived at the foot 
of Mount Kelberini, bend to the left along its foot, 
following a paved road which overhangs the edge 
of the marsh. 

In the midst of this pass at 7.7 are some copious 
springs issuing from under the mountain, and 
forming a large stream; it is supposed to be the 
subterraneous discharge of the Lake of loannina, 
and flows to the lagoon of Logaru. The marsh now 
becomes more deep and impracticable, and the 
mountain steep and rocky, the exhalations are 
offensive, and numerous serpents are seen on the 
water’s edge. At 7.40 the pass ends, and the 
marsh retires to the left, leaving a cultivated plain 
which extends to Strivina in front, but narrows to 
the right, where it terminates in an ascending 
valley, the direct route and natural opening of 
communication from the Gulf of Arta to the plain 
of loannina. At a khan called Khandpulo we 
leave that road to the right, and proceed for the 
night to Strivina, where by order of the bishop a 
cottage had been prepared for me. This village 
contains 30 or 40 families, who are chiefly em- 
ployed in the culture of tobacco on the banks of a 
stream, of which the sources are in the village. 
After flowing through a marshy plain, it forms one 
of the tributaries of the river of Luro. 

June 28.—Setting out this morning at 4.30, we 
rejoin the road to Ioannina at the entrance of the 
valley above-mentioned at 5, then ascend the dry 
bed of a torrent, and at 5.30 leave the village of 
Kometzades' a quarter of a mile to the right, 

* Κομετζάδες. 


220 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


situated on uneven ground on the side of the 
torrent, which here issues from between two high 
summits of Mount Kelberini. To our left, at the 
same time, are the remains of a small triangular 
Hellenic fortress, standing on the summit of a hill, 
which commanded the entrance of this important 
pass. The walls are in some parts still standing 
to a considerable height. 

From hence we continue to ascend, passing a 
little to the right of Koliadhes'; and at 6.38, arriv- 
ing at the summit of the pass, descend into a small 
valley included between steep rocky mountains. 
At 7.10 the village of Muliana is half a mile on 
the right, on the mountain’s side, situated at the 
entrance of a lateral pass which leads to the vale 
of the Arachthus, over Mount Kelberini, or rather 
which separates that summit from Xerovuni, a 
ridge following the same northerly direction as 
the former. The Vezir has lately built a serai at 
Muliana, and has constructed a good paved road 
by which we cross a counterfort of the mountain 
to Pende Pigadhia’, where are a few cottages, 
and a little beyond them the five wells which give 
name to the place. It is situated just at the open- 
ing of the pass where it begins to descend into an 
elevated plain, similar to that below Muliana, but 
much more extensive, and equally bordered on 
either side by a steep rocky mountain. We arrive 
at the khan of the Five Wells at 8.38, and make 
a long halt, for at this season of the year it is 
necessary to divide the day’s journey, and to rest 


1 Κολιάδες. * ra Πέντε Πηγάδια. 


v. | EPIRUS. 221 


during the meridian hours, which, especially in 
the villages, are by far more quiet than the night, 
when asses, hogs, dogs, fowls, rats, bugs, fleas, 
gnats, are all in a state of activity. Of the three 
latter plagues, which by adding want of sleep to 
the effects of fatigue and climate often contribute 
powerfully to destroy a traveller’s health, the flea 
is the only one from which he may not be pro- 
tected by a well constructed mosquito netting. 
This torment and the excessive heat are the chief 
impediments to the traveller’s repose in the day, 
for as to the incessant chirping of the wood- 
cricket, he soon becomes accustomed to it, though 
he will hardly bring himself to consider its note 
musical, as the ancients seem to have thought. 

At 3.15 p.m. we descend from the khan into 
the valley, with the village of Varlam on the left, 
and beyond it the mountain Olytzika', as the 
highest point of the range to the left of our road, 
and the most remarkable peak in all the surround- 
ing country is now called. I know not where we 
are to look for its ancient name. Below Varlam 
are some fields of tobacco, but the chief produce 
of this valley, as well as of that below Muliana, is 
kalambokki. 

At 4.45, after having crossed the plain, there is 
a further descent, with the village of Pesta on the 
right, to a fine source of water on the road side. 
Here, to the left, on the opposite side of the valley, 


᾿Ολύτξζικα. I follow the or- ing, as usual where the 7Z is 
thography of Meletius in this concerned, is Olytjka. 
name; but the vulgar sound- 


222 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


rises a sloping cultivated hill, on the summit of 
which are the ruins of a triangular Hellenic for- 
tress, naturally fortified at the back by a preci- 
pice, which overhangs the ravine lying between it 
and Mount Olytzika. Twenty minutes farther 
there is another paled-kastro, at about an equal 
distance to the left of our road, of the same kind 
as the former, and similarly situated, but the hill 
is steeper, higher, and more uneven, and the in- 
closed space is larger. We now begin to descend 
towards the great plam of loannina, and at 5.52 
arrive at the khan and small village of St. Deme- 
trius, situated in a little bay of the plam, half an 
hour beyond which, Bartzi is on the side of the 
hills on the left; hereabouts are several round 
ponds in the plain, some of which are covered 
with water lilies. We hasten forward, and at 
eight arrive at loannina. The distance from Arta 
is about forty-two miles by the road. In time, itis 
thus generally reckoned : from Arta to Khanopulo, 
1.30; to Kometzadhes, 1.30; to a ruined khan 
under Muliana, 1.30; to Pendepigadhia, 1.30 ; 
to Ai Dhimitri, 3; to loannina, 3. Total, 12 
hours, or 14 with baggage. 

June 29.—Since my visit to the Vezir at Tepe- 
léni, he has built a foundery at Bunila, in the 
plain of loannina, where he had before established 
a colony of Bulgarians, whom he brought here in 
1802, on his return from the Danube, and lodged 
in cottages built in a qradrangle, like their own 
native palankas. When I asked His Highness how 
he procured copper to make his gun-metal, “1 
collect it,” he says, ‘‘ from my subjects; one fur- 


v.| EPIRUS. 293 


nishes an old pot, and another a kettle’ A mag- 
nificent room, which he has just finished in his 
new serai in the Kastro, is probably not surpassed 
by those of the Sultan himself. It is covered with 
a Gobelin carpet, which has the cypher of the 
King of France on it, and was purchased by the 
Pasha’s agent at Corfa. His Highness has lately 
taken Dr. Frank, formerly one of the physicians of 
the French army of Egypt, into his service, at 
10,000 piastres a year. In the evening he has 
some mortar practice at Bunila, with an old five 
or six inch mortar, which has been considerably 
damaged by its employment im the siege of Suli. 
They fire loaded shells, one of which explodes 
close to a party of Greeks standing upon a height, 
but fortunately without hurting any of them. The 
Pasha laughs very heartily at the joke. We then 
visit the foundery, the roof of which seems likely 
to fall. 

July 1.—This afternoon I set out on a tour to 
Suli, accompanied by the Italian renegade Meh- 
mét Effendi, together with one of the Vezir’s trusty 
Albanian bolu-bashis, and his chief architect named 
Peter of Korytza, who constructed the bridge and 
serai at Tepeléni, and has built many others of the 
Pasha’s palaces and castles. His Highness furnishes 
me with an excellent mule, for the mountain paths, 
from his own stable. We proceed no farther this 
evening than Rapsista, a village distant 1.30 hour 
from the city, in the middle of the plain on the 
right hand side of the road to Ai Dhimitri. On 
the hills above Rapsista are two or three convents 
prettily situated among woods of pirnaria. 

12 


224 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


July 2.—At 4.10 this morning we quit Rapsista, 
leaving the baggage to follow; at 5.40 leave the 
khan of Ai Dhimitri half a mile on the left, then 
ascending the lowest part of the mountain which 
borders the western side of the plain of Ioannina, we 
arrive at six in a small level on the summit where 
the village Ferekisi' is at a short distance on the 
left, from thence descend into the valley of the 
Varia, and at 6.23 arrive at that stream near 
the, beginning of its course. On our left, as we 
proceed, is the ridge which separates this valley 
from that of Pesta and Varlam, and on two points 
of which are the two Hellenic castles mentioned on 
the 28th of June. We now cross another ridge, 
in the middle ascent of which are some ancient 
sepulchres and remains of Hellenic walls in and 
beside the road, and then descend to Variadhes, 
where we arrive at 8. This is a small village, 
with a kula or pyrgo belonging to the Vezir, situ- 
ated at the eastern foot of the southern summit of 
Mount Olytzika, where the wri overlook the 
narrow vale of the Varia. 

From Variadhes, at 3.30 p.m., we proceed to 
cross the lowest part of the southern summit of 
Mount Olytzika, and arrive at 5.3 at a church of 
St. Elias, standing on the crest of the ridge which 
separates the valley of the Varia from that of a 
branch of the river of Suli, and commands a view 
of both. We descend the slope obliquely to the 
left, and at 6.45 arrive at Dervidjana, properly 
Tervitziana’, situated amidst fountains, large wal- 


* Φερεκήσι. ? Τερβιτζιανά. 


v. | EPIRUS. 225 


nut trees, vineyards and gardens,-—on the middle 
descent of the ridge, and enjoying a prospect of 
the valley below it, which is beautifully diversified 
with broken ground, streams, woods, and culti- 
vated fields. At seven we arrive at the farther end 
of the village, at the kula of the Bolu-bashi, an 
Albanian of unusually polished manners. 

July 3.—At four this morning we descend into 
the valley, and after passing a tributary of the 
river of Suli, cross at 5.30 the principal branch, 
which, taking its rise near the village of Lakia, is 
called the Lakidtiko. The hills at the foot of 
Mount Nasheri', which is a peaked summit, sepa- 
rated only by a hollow from Olytzika, are covered 
with oaks, some of which are large. All the vil- 
lages in this beautiful valley formed a part of the 
Suliote league in the time of its greatest power, 
when Variadhes, the vale of Varia, and all as far 
as the summit, overlooking the plain of loannina, 
were included init. The village of Paledkastro, 
which is a mile and a half on the left after crossing 
the river, belonged to the Botzari family. Three 
minutes farther we begin to ascend the great moun- 
tain of Suli at the kula and tjiftlik of Romanates, 
where are some ruins of another tower, which was 
surprised and blown up by the Suliotes during the 
war. Aly’s Albanians having, as they thought, 
secured the place, went to forage, leaving a few 
of their youngest soldiers in it, and on their return 
remained at night on the outside. During the 
night the Suliotes, approaching silently, set fire to 


: Νάσσερι. 
VOL. I. Q 


226 EPIRUS. | CHAP. 


a mine which they had left at the foot of the 
tower, and, as soon as it exploded, attacked and 
slew, or dispersed, the Albanians. After the war, 
the Vezir destroyed the church of Romanates, and 
converted the village into a tyiftlik. From hence 
the ascent of the mountain is in a steep zigzag ; 
the road has been well made, but in some places 
the borders are giving way. At 6.40 we pass a 
copious Ἐρύσις, or source of water, in a hollow 
grown with pirndria; and continuing from thence 
to ascend, arrive at 7.28 on the crest of the ridge, 
about a mile to the southward of the highest sum- 
mit of the mountain. Lefkadha is in sight to the 
southward ; Paxt and Andipaxo to the west, with 
the hills behind Parga and the coast near Port 
Fanari: but Suli and its vicinity are hidden by a 
lower summit of the mountain, immediately over- 
hanging them. 

After a halt of six minutes we begin to descend ; 
pass many remains of the konaks, or temporary 
huts of loose stone constructed by the contending 
parties during the siege; and having descended 
the steep mountain on foot, arrive at 8.45 at the 
village of Suli. On the side of the mountain 
grows a great quantity of a small fragrant species 
of abrotonum, not very common in Greece, and 
here named ἀπιστία. 

Suli, called Kakosuli from its fame and strength, 
like the Κακοΐλιον of Homer, or Megalo-Suli, to 
distinguish it from another Suli on the Kalama 
below Zitza, contains 150 scattered houses, all of 
which are in ruins, except five or six, tenanted by 
Musulman Albanians, to whom the Vezir means 

12 


v. | EPIRUS. 227 


to add a colony of Christians from the neighbour- 
hood of Tepeléni. The ruins of the principal church 
he is now converting into a mosque. The houses, 
which seem all to have been built on a similar 
plan, were small square buildings, with a pitched 
roof and two stories, of which the lower was a store 
or stable, and the upper contained two apartments. 
They were dispersed among terraces, artificially 
formed on the side of the hill, and now unculti- 
vated, but which formerly bore potherbs, and corn, 
among fruit-trees. In the height of their prosperity, 
the Suliotes possessed all the adjacent part of the 
plain of Glyky, containing rice grounds and maize 
fields,inthe culture of which they employed the Greek 
peasants of that district, thinking such employments 
beneath them, and delighting only in robbery, war, 
and idleness. The instances of their activity, of 
their swiftness in walking over the mountains and 
through roads and passages, to us impassable, of 
their expertness in the use of the musket, of their 
keenness of sight, in which they excelled all other | 
Albanians, who themselves are exceeded only by 
the Arabs of the desert; their vigilance and saga- 
city, their ability in planning, and activity in exe- 
cuting, the most refined stratagems of their desul- 
tory warfare, would, in some instances, exceed 
belief, if they were not so universally attested by 
their enemies. Their power of vision in the night 
is particularly mentioned in terms of astonishment 
by the troops of Aly Pasha, who opposed them. 

From Suli we proceeded south-westward to the 
hill of Kughni', an Albanian word, which the 

* Kovyyn. The pronunciation is that of Kugni in Italian. 

Q 2 


228 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


Greeks interpret λόφος, a summit: the fort of 
Kukia occupies the southern point of the hill, and 
is distant from Suli 35 minutes’. Kukia was the 
last point which resisted the arms of Aly. He is 
now erecting a new fortress on the spot, after 
having levelled all the walls, huts, and meteris of 
the Suliotes, as well as their church: 4 or 500° 
yards to the northward of Kakia, and not much 
lower than that point, is a peak called Ai Dhonato 
(St. Donatus), from a church which formerly 
stood there, and which the Pasha converted into a 
kula, and made the head quarters of the siege. 
Having descended by the same road to the foot 
of the hill of Kughni, we fall into that from Suli 
to Kiafa, near the ruined village of Samoniva, 
and in half an hour arrive at the ruins of Kiafa, 
or Gkiafa?, situated amidst a few terraces and 
fruit-trees, and from thence, ascending the hill of 
Trypa, in Albanian Bira, arrive at a new fortress, 
not yet completed, situated on the summit of this 
narrow ridge, and midway between its two extremi- 
ties. The south-eastern end of the height is the Bira, 
properly so called, which gives name to the whole 
ridge; the north-western is specifically named 
Breke Vetetimis, in Greek ἡ Ῥαχὴ τῆς ᾿Αστραπῆς, 
or the Hill of Lightning, because in stormy wea- 
ther the lightning often strikes the summit, so 
often indeed that the Suliotes were obliged to give 
up building upon it. A kula which the Pasha 
erected there last year has already had one of its 
angles beaten down by a thunderbolt. This point, 


1 See a topographical sketch of Suli, at the end of this volume. 
? Κιάφα, or Γκιάφα. 


v.| EPIRUS. 229 


in fact, being lofty and precipitous, and sur- 
rounded by an amphitheatre of much higher 
mountains, cannot fail often to attract the electric 
fluid. Northward it looks down upon Kughni, at. 
the distance of 1000 or 1200 yards, and is sepa- 
rated from that hill by a narrow vale, in which the 
Lakidtiko, or main branch of the river of Suli is 
joined by the Tzingaridtiko, so called as rising near 
the village of Tzingéri, on the mountain which 
rises to the northward of the hill of Kughni. The 
fortress in the middle of Mount Trypa, which the 
Vezir began to build as soon as he obtained posses- 
sion of Suli, is now nearly finished : my companion 
Kyr Petros, of Korytza, is the architect. The crest 
of the ridge is so narrow, that there is just room for 
a path, and Kyr Petros was obliged to level the 
hill before he began the castle. Towards the 
mountain of Tzikurates, which is separated from 
the hill of Trypa by the river, and commands it on 
the southern side, as the mountain of Suli does 
on the eastern, he has built bomb-proof ma- 
gazines, casemates, and cisterns. He has also 
completed a house for the officer in command, 
and is now building a large serai for the Vezir in 
the middle of the fort. The only guns at pre- 
sent here are two short pieces of brass, carrying 
a 12lb. ball. These and two five or six inch 
mortars were all the artillery used in the siege. 
The hill of Trypa towards the river is a rapid 
descent, covered with loose stones, and inter- 
rupted in many places with precipices and pointed 
rocks ; although the slope forms an angle of about 


230 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


30° with the horizon, the women of Trypa were in 
the habit of mounting it, with large jars of water 
from the river, upon their heads. The south- 
eastern end of the ridge of Trypa terminates in 
three pointed summits, the two northern of which 
are surmounted by kulas, lately erected by the 
Pasha to contain a guard of Albanians; one of 
these buildings has already been damaged by the 
lightning, but not so much as the tower at the 
opposite extremity of the mountain. The hollow 
between the two northern summits of the south- 
eastern end is properly the Trypa or cavity from 
which the whole mountain takes its name, but 
the posts of the Suliotes extended over all this 
extremity of the hill, and their meteris may still 
be traced as far as the place where the southern 
gate of the fortress now stands; 100 yards to the 
south of which, is a small Suliote church still 
subsisting. As it was necessary for the Pasha, 
when he had expelled the Suliotes, to build a 
fortress for his Albanian garrison, he could not 
have chosen a better site. Suli, however, al- 
though it would be troublesome to him in the 
hands of an enemy, is of no importance as a pass 
or point of communication between the several 
parts of Aly’s dominions, nor can it be of much 
use to him as a place of refuge in case of disaster, 
for the mountains on both sides command it within 
a moderate range of cannon-shot; and although 
they are very difficult of access on all sides, an 
active enemy, if superior in the field, would soon 
find the means of transporting artillery over them. 


v.| EPIRUS. 231 


Upon all the summits around Suli are still seen 
the remains of the Meteris and Konaks which 
were erected by the Pasha’s troops during the 
siege. The former are upon all the most ad- 
vanced and commanding points of the mountains, 
and are nothing more than little breastworks of 
stone, from behind which the besieger fired his 
long heavy musquet, resting it on the top of the 
wall. The konaks, or lodgings, were in the most 
unexposed situations, and were just large enough 
to afford shelter during their hours of repose, to 
the men who were stationed at that point of the 
investment. As the siege proceeded, the meteris 
were drawn nearer, serving the purpose of ap- 
proaches in a regular siege, and blockading the 
posts of the Suliotes until they were reduced to 
starvation. In like manner the konaks of the Suli- 
otes are to be seen on all the rocky points and 
precipices of the hills of Trypa and Kughni. 

The river, after the junction of the two branches, 
flows through the Klisura, or narrow opening be- 
tween the mountains of Tzikurates and. Zavrikho, 
into the plain of Glyky, where it is generally 
known by the name of the Suliotiko, or river of 
Suli. Along the rocky sides and precipices of the 
Klisura, above the left bank of the river, the Vezir 
has lately made a good paved horse road from 
Suli to Glyky, so that now there is a road, though 
in some parts rather dangerous, through the entire 
pass, communicating from the plain of Luro, or of 
loannina, into that of Glyky. 

The view from the Hill of Lightning compre- 
hends all the adjacent part of the plain of Glyky 


232 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


with its numerous villages, and I perceive at once 
that the river is the ancient Acheron; for after 
winding through the plain it traverses a lake, or 
marsh, or rather combination of both, which is 
evidently the ancient Palus Acherusia, and then 
falls into the harbour called Porto Fanari, or 
Splantza, which (it is equally manifest) is the 
Glycys Limen’: so great is the quantity of water 
poured into it from the lake and river, that the 
water of the harbour is observed to be generally 
fresh, as the ancient name implies. The harbour 
and a great part of the Acherusia are hidden from 
Trypa by a part of the mountain of Tzikurates. 
At the foot of the hills of Margariti which rise 
from the western side of the plain of the Acheron, 
is a marsh called Vuvo, through which passes a 
river of the same name, flowing from the vicinity 
of Paramythia. Its subsequent course is traceable 
through the plain to a high stone bridge near 
Kastri, a name generally indicative of an ancient 
site, and in this instance derived from the con- 
spicuous ruins of a large Hellenic city on a height 
above the village. The Νανό, as 1 am informed, 
afterwards winds to the left in a direction nearly 
parallel to the Acheron, and joins that river near 
the sea. It is probably the ancient Cocytus. 

In the lower part of the plain the Sulidtiko or 
Acheron is more commonly called Fanaritiko, or 
the river of Fanari; this name (in Albanian, Frai) 


' For the Acheron, Cocytus, lax in Θεσπρωτοί. Liv. 1]. 8, 
Acherusia, and Glycys Limen, c. 24. Strabo, p. 824. Pau- 
see Thucyd. ]. 1, c. 46. Scy- san. Attic. c. 17. 


v.| EPIRUS. 233 


being generally applied to the plain around and 
below the Acherusia, as Glyky is to the portion 
above it towards Suli. Formerly there was a vil- 
lage and church of Glyky near the right bank of 
the river, a little below the spot where it emerges 
from the gorges of Suli into the plain. But this 
church was destroyed by the Vezir two months 
ago, and there now remain only two or three of 
the buttresses which sustained the walls, and which 
may be remarked from the Trypa. During the 
war this was an important military post of the 
Suliotes, and sometimes was equally useful to their 
besiegers. The name Glyky, by a process of 
change not uncommon in all countries, seems to 
have spread from the harbour to the plain, and 
afterwards to have been applied specifically to a 
place, where, though nothing but a ruined church 
is now to be seen, there was probably a town of 
the Lower Empire; for Glyky still gives title in 
conjunction with Buthrotum to one of the bishops 
of the province of loannina, whose residence is 
Paramythia, and the church at Glyky is acknow- 
ledged to have been the cathedral of that diocese. 

At Glyky the plain is about five miles wide, and 
extends to the right in a northerly direction four 
hours to Paramythia. This large town, which is in- 
accessible to me at present on account of the hosti- 
lity of its chief family to Aly Pasha, is situated at 
the extremity of the valley of the Vuvo, and hasa 
castle behind it on a steep and lofty hill, near the 
foot of the range which terminates to the south- 
ward in the mountain of Zavrikho and the Klistra 
of Suli. The entire range, like most of the moun- 


234 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


tains around Suli, is bare and rocky in the middle, 
but is covered at the summit with pine-trees. 

The official name of Paramythia, by which it is 
always designated in the firmahns of the Porte, is 
Aidonat Kalesi, or the Castle of Aidonat, which 
doubtless is a corruption of Ἅγιος Aovaroc, Or St. 
Donatus, who was the patron of this part of the 
country: the church of Glyk¥ was dedicated to 
him, as well as another on the ridge of Kughni, 
and a third in the village of Suli. It is curious 
that his name should so nearly resemble, especially 
in modern Greek pronunciation, that of ᾿Αἰδωνεὺς, 
the ancient monarch of this country; for though 
the Greek mythology confounded Aidoneus with 
the lord of the infernal regions, he appears to have 
been in reality the mortal possessor of the valua- 
ble district watered by the Acheron, at the time 
when Theseus, prince of Athens, was on his tra- 
vels. 

The Suliotes, having no written memorials nor 
any clear traditions older than a century, it can 
only be offered as a conjecture, founded on strong 
probability, that Suli was occupied in the thir- 
teenth or beginning of the fourteenth century, by 
a colony of those Albanians, who, at the latter 
period, overran the Despotate of the West, avoid- 
ing loannina the capital, which was in the hands 
of Greek, Servian; or Frank princes; but settling 
at Arta and on the banks of the Achelous, and ex- 
tending themselves, as their present settlements 
and the use of their language indicate, throughout 
maritime Hpirus, from Illyria nearly to the Am- 
bracic Gulf. The Turks, when they penetrated 


v. | EPIRUS. 235 


into Epirus, were satisfied with the conquest of 
Arta and loannina, and had little temptation to 
enter the poorer and more mountainous parts of 
the country, which neither the Greeks, Vlakhiotes, 
nor Albanians, who possessed them, were disposed 
to yield without a struggle. The Albanians soon 
discovered that the Ottoman empire was an ex- 
cellent mart for their services as mercenary in- 
fantry; but that, in order to obtain all the advan- 
tages in view, it was necessary to profess the domi- 
nant religion. The consequence has been, that 
more than half the nation has become Musulman, 
that Mahometan Albanians are to be found in the 
service of every chieftain or governor of that faith, 
from the Straits of Gibraltar, to Arabia, Persia, 
and the Danube; and that at home they have 
either brought the Christians under their yoke, or 
have forced them to take refuge under a milder 
despotism in Southern Greece or Asia Minor. 
To the former country the stream of Albanian 
migration had been setting, even before the 
Turkish conquest ; those countries having already 
been depopulated by wars, or by the bad govern- 
ment of the Franks and the Byzantine Greeks. 
Such is now the military preponderancy of the 
Musulman faith in Albania, that with the excep- 
tion of a tribe belonging to the Roman church, in 
the district of Skodra, the Khimariotes are the 
only Christian Albanians who preserve their inde- 
pendence. The Suliotes were the last who fell 
under the Mahometan yoke. 

During the past century, as well in the early 
part of it, when loannina was governed by a 


236 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


Musellim dependent on the Pasha of Arta, as after 
the year 1740, when it became the head of a Pa- 
shalik, the Suliotes were constantly engaged in 
war, with the neighbouring beys of Margariti, 
Paramythia, or Ioannina; for it was not until 
Aly succeeded to the government of Ioannina, in 
the year 1788, that a factious oligarchy, similar to 
that of the Albanian towns, and which had left 
very little authority to the Sultan’s officer, was 
rendered powerless, and has at length been stripped 
by Aly of the greater part of their property. The 
Suliotes soon found that they had an opponent in 
Aly far more formidable than they had yet known ; 
and that to resist such a bold and crafty enemy 
would require all their energy. Nor was the 
Pasha less prompt in arriving at the conviction 
that he could have little hope of extending his 
power in the degree which his ambition contem- 
plated, until he had reduced the Suliotes, who 
were a constant rallying point to the Christians, 
were capable of strengthening by their alliance 
every Mahometan chieftain disposed to resist him, 
and even threatened his capital whenever he might 
be engaged in any distant undertaking. By his 
usual artifices, he succeeded first in turning against 
them one or two of their Musulman neighbours, 
and then the Christian armatoli of Acarnania and 
Ajtolha ; which so provoked the Suliotes, that their 
predatory excursions, hitherto confined to hostile 
and neighbouring places, were extended to Makri- 
noro, or to the passes leading from Arta to loan- 
nina, and even into the plain of Ioannina, where 
they plundered travellers without distinction, and 


v. | EPIRUS. | 237 


never spared the life of a Mahometan unless with 
the prospect of a heavy ransom. 

The war between Aly and the Suliotes was 
actively carried on during the years 1790 and 
1791. In 1792 the Pasha made that formidable 
attack upon the mountain itself which has been 
related by Eton on the authority of a Greek inter- 
preter in the ‘service of the French consulate at 
Saloniki, who happened to be at Ioannina at the 
time. His army approached Suli from the plain 
of Glyky, forced the Klistra with difficulty, met 
with a still more resolute opposition in the pass of 
Paraskevi, which leads between the hills of Kughni 
and Bira to Megalo-Suli; but succeeded by the 
effect of superior numbers in obtaining a momen- 
tary possession of the town, when both women and 
men rushing forth against them, and an attack 
being made at the same instant on their rear, by a 
party which for this purpose waited only to receive 
a signal from Bira, the Mahometans were totally 
defeated with an immense slaughter, and with very 
little loss to the Suliotes. Mukhtar escaped with 
difficulty, and Aly fled with precipitation to Ioan- 
nina, fearing to be intercepted. 

This victory saved the Suliotes from any serious 
danger for the next six years, during which they 
were aided by a tacit, but not less real alliance 
with the Venetian towns of Prévyza and Parga; 
and through them with the adjacent islands, the 
Septinsular government having always been sensi- 
ble of the necessity of maintaining good terms with 
the tribes of the opposite continent, and of prevent- 


238 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


ing any single chieftain from acquiring too large 
a portion of the Epirote coast, upon which the 
islands depend for the supply of several objects of 
prime necessity. Ultimately, however, this con- 
nection of Suli with the Venetian places was des- 
tined to contribute to its ruin; for when the de- 
signs of the French Republic against Turkey be- 
came apparent, Suli was involved in the denun- 
ciations of the Porte against all those who were 
suspected of being friendly to the French in this 
quarter ; and when Aly had taken Prévyza, it gave 
him great influence over all the neighbouring 
Musulmans, and left them no plea for declining 
to join him against the Suliotes, as abettors of 
enemies who threatened the Turkish empire with 
destruction. 

Before the Suliote war, which began in 1798, 
the increase of Aly’s power and his unceasing ac- 
tivity had curtailed the Suliotes of some of their 
dependencies, and had diminished the number of 
their combatants. The history of this last and 
longest of the Suliote wars, which continued to 
1803 without any intermission except in the year 
1802, when Aly Pasha, as Rumili Valesi, was em- 
ployed against the adherents of Pasvant Ogla near 
Adrianople, has been written by a native of Parga, 
a part of whose narrative has been printed. As 
he seems to be a man of some education, who 
treated the subject with great minuteness and ap- 
parent accuracy, and was anxiously watching the 
progress of events in a neighbouring and allied 
town, it would be in vain to attempt to collect a 


v. | EPIRUS. 239 


more correct account from the illiterate actors in 
the contest, now dispersed over every part of the 
Vezir’s dominions, or in the Seven Islands’. 

The greatest misfortune, or rather the certain 
ruin of Suli, was the defection of its own citizens. 
The arch-traitor was George Bétzari, who received 
a bribe from the Vezir to desert with his fara 
before the war began, and who, in the course of it, 
tempted others to follow his example. Bira was 
lost in this manner, by the desertion of the Zer- 
vates, about two months after the loss of the town 
of Suli, and Avariko m consequence of a similar 
treachery on the part of Pylios Gusi. After the fall 
of Bira, the Vezir’s troops began to invest the hill of 
Kughni, where 300 families were collected. The four 
pieces of ordnance before-mentioned were placed at 
Ai Dhonato, and on the side of the Hill of Light- 
ning, in situations which are on a lower level than 
the summit of Kughni. The Pasha was totally in 
want of artillery-men ; and although his shells de- 
stroyed the houses of Kughni, not more than three 
of the garrison were killed by them. The Suliotes 
made bomb-proofs by digging holes in the ground, 
and covering them with a slanting roof of timber, 
spread with boughs and earth. The women took 
refuge in a cavern, or in little konaks of loose 
stones, constructed for the occasion on the western 
side of the hill, where they were covered from the 
enemy's fire. On the summit there was nothing 
but a slight wall, comprehending a small church 


* For an abstract of this work, see a note at the end of this 
volume. 


240 EPIRUS. | CHAP. 


to the eastward, of which the foundations now 
remain. ‘The rest of the fortress consisted only of 
the walls of the exterior houses, united and loop- 
holed. The Vezir’s Mahometan Albanians showed 
as much perseverance in the attack as their Chris- 
tian opponents in the defence: the former climbed 
up the sides of the hill, particularly on the west, 
and made some small meteris of stone at the dis- 
tance of a few yards only from the enemy’s konaks. 
The Suliote women exposed themselves to the fire 
of the enemy, supplied the men with water, am- 
munition and provisions, and when not otherwise 
employed, discharged vollies of verbal abuse against 
the assailants. When resistance began to be hope- 
less, a part of the garrison made their escape by 
forcing their way over the enemy’s meteris, like 
the Plateeans in the Peloponnesian war. The de- 
fence was chiefly prolonged by the exhortations 
and example of a priest named Samuel, a native 
of one of the 4/g@an islands, who had the care of 
the ammunition and provisions, and who, after the 
capitulation, was blown up in the magazine, which 
stood at the northern end of the hill, within the 
present fortress. One of the Pasha’s officers, who 
had been sent to receive the fortress and its stores, 
suffered with him and two or three other persons, 
which seems to prove that the explosion was either 
accidental, or premeditated by the priest, and not 
as some persons imagine, the result of a scheme 
of Aly Pasha, to get rid in this manner of his 
most formidable opponent; but who, in fact, was 
already in his power. The Vezir’s Albanians assert 
that it was an accident; but the Suliotes main- 


v. | EPIRUS. 241 


tain that it was the deed of Samuel, which is very 
probable, as he could not expect any mercy if 
taken, and as it accords with his determined cha- 
racter, and with that of the Greeks in general, who 
often exhibit similar examples of desperation. The 
remaining families had permission to retire unmo- 
lested in whatever direction they thought fit; but 
the Vezir, in violation of his promises, intercepted 
many of them in their retreat, and brought them 
to Ioannina. Of those who escaped, the greater 
part are now in the Greek corps, formed by the 
Russians in the islands, and many of the women 
and children are in the domestic service of the 
Christians of Epirus. There are now about seventy 
men prisoners at Joannina, and as many women 
and children. These the Vezir gradually disperses 
among his tjiftliks as labourers, and generally 
sends them to the most disagreeable and unhealthy 
situations. 

July 4.—-This afternoon, having descended on 
foot from the castle to the ruins of the village of 
Kiafa, we proceed at 3.45 eastward, along the 
hollow between the mountain of Suli and the hill 
of Trypa. At the end of this pass, just under the 
Trypa, stands the ruined village of Avariko', from 
whence there is a descent into a deep ravine, 
formed by the meeting of the two great mountains 
of Suli and Tzikurates; one of the darkest and 
deepest of the glens of Greece: on either side rise 
perpendicular rocks, in the midst of which are 
little intervals of scanty soil, bearing holly-oaks, 
ilices, and other shrubs, and which admit occa- 

’ APapixoc. 

VOL, I. R 


242 EPIRUS. (CHAP. 


sionally a view of the higher summits of the two 
mountains covered with oaks, and at the summit 
of all with pines. Here the road is passable only 
on foot, by a perilous ledge along the side of the 
mountain of Suli; terminating at a narrow open- 
ing, where the Acheron enters the defile from the 
vale of Tervitziana. The river in the pass is deep 
and rapid, and is seen at the bottom falling in many 
places in cascades over the rocks, though at too great 
a distance to be heard, and in most places inac- 
cessible to any but the foot of a goat or a Suliote. 
On the side of the road, at intervals, planks are 
collected, which have been sawn out of the oaks 
on the spot, and left in readiness to be removed. 
At 5.45 we arrive at the end of the defile, and 
descend into a valley, where the river, coming 
from-the north in a direction almost at right angles 
to its course through the Suliote glens, previously 
makes many turns and meanders, as if unwilling 
to enter such a gloomy passage. At 6, leaving 
Seritziana close to the right, where only five or 
six houses now remain, and to the left Gorana, 
standing on the side of the range of Tziku- 
rates, we cross the river at 6.15, and immediately 
ascend into a vale, or opening between the ridge 
of Tzikurates and Mount Nasseri, which latter 
here changes its direction, and turns eastward to- 
wards Luro and the Gulf of Arta. From hence 
riding over a beautiful undulated valley, naturally 
fertile, but little cultivated, we arrive at 7 at Zer- 
mi, where the Vezir has lately built a tyiftlik of 
five or six cottages, inclosed by a square wall. 
My konak is an open gallery on the outside of one 


v. | EPIRUS. 243 


of the huts. In the evening the whole atmosphere 
glitters with fire flies. 

July 5.—At 4.20, a.m. we begin to follow the 
same valley, descending towards the south-east : 
the sides of the hills and the valley become more 
woody as we advance. At 5 the monastery of 
Arass6' is a little on the right at the foot of the 
mountain, and Zerlia a small village is on the 
heights to the left. Near the monastery there 
are said to be many ancient sepulchres, few of 
which have ever been opened; they show that 
the monastery occupies a Hellenic site. As the 
name appears to be ancient, Arassus may very 
possibly have been one of those numerous cities 
of Epirus unnoticed by history, but of which the 
former existence is well attested by their remains. 
At 5.30 a tumulus occurs on the road side, and 
at 5.45 the village Kutzandpulo on the hill to 
the left. We soon afterwards arrive on the bank 
_ of a dry torrent, shaded with fine planes, where 
the valley opens towards the Gulf of Arta, and a 
rich level is covered with plantations of maize. 
Leaving the castle and village of Luro a quarter 
of an hour on the left, we proceed to skirt the foot 
of the mountain of Zalongo which is united by a 
lower ridge with the hills on the right side of the 
vale which we have passed. After having made 
the semi-tour of the mountain, through a wood of 
small oaks, Libokhovo remains three quarters of a 
mile to the left, at 8; soon after which we begin 
to ascend the southern face of the mountain, and 


* ᾽Αρασσός. 


RZ 


244 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


at 8.20 arrive at Kamarina', a village of 30 or 40 
Greek families, situated among fruit gardens at 
the copious sources of a little stream which flows 
to the plain of Lamari, and there unites with a 
river which falls into the sea a little to the south- 
ward of a small harbour called Agriapidhia. 

My lodging is a chamber and open gallery in 
the serai, as it is called, of a Christian captain of 
Armatoli, named lanaki, who is entrusted by the 
Vezir with the government of the surrounding 
district. The village commands a beautiful view 
of the gulf and plain of Arta, with the mountains 
around them, including the Makrinéro, the hills 
of Valto and Xerémero, and to the southward, the 
town, channel, and whole island of Lefkadha, 
ending in Cape Ducato, to the right of which is 
seen the Point of Viscardo, in Kefalonia. Within 
this magnificent amphitheatre appear the town of 
Prévyza, the peninsulas of Actiwm and JVicopolis, 
and immediately below us an undulated country 
and plain, consisting of pasture, corn-fields, and 
olives, forming the district of Lamari. A line of 
tall detached masses is seen stretching across the 
plain, formed of a mixture of stone and Roman 
tile. These are the piers of the ruined a 
of Nicopolis. 

The summit of the mountain of Zalongo’, which 
is a mile to the north-eastward of Kamarina, is 
famed for having twice been the scene of a gallant 
resistance of the Suliotes. On the first occasion, 


* Kapapiva. and λόγγος, a forest, in middle 
? Ζάλυγγος, from Za, intens. and modern Greek. 


ws fides il ΤΠ ivy ee 
Νὰ Δ ti My ie 
π᾿ ! ssi lil AW ~_ ~ 
ΞΞ: 
τ ᾿ r 
AND τι ΝΝὶ 


\ 
CASSOPE. x \ 


ZALONGO 


G wed 
visi ἣν 



















"Z Ξ Ξ 
Pin ~ me ie si — is Whe 


« Meto seed 2 of 


el y Y of Ci 





Zalo ng ἐς 2 | 
zy Vay, τ᾿ : 
png =~ é 
p NG ῃ S 
᾿ τ᾽ τι". 
a Son gani < 
i) ᾿ 


i 


Uf 


ZB 


Zs 
4 
























7 Ὁ" 
Ξ bs = 7 + 

=> ssor ES |= 

= .. A CASSOPE ‘thn, 

= = Vs sl My, 
= Ξ _ Sle Z = 

δ dation = =S= = Vv < 

G ZY 

τὰν a me) yyy ™ fin 

- ὰκ 


sp 


at 
f 


eet ᾿ 


Ι 
Mi 


ὶὶ 


Ι 
l 


246 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


100 families, who had retired hither by capitula- 
tion from Suli and Kiafa, and who had lived on 
the hill unmolested until the reduction of Kughni, 
were suddenly attacked by order of the Vezir, on 
the pretence that the natural strength of the po- 
sition had tempted them to commit acts of hostility 
against him. When affairs became desperate, 
Kitzo Botzari and a party with him escaped. Of 
the rest, 150 persons were made slaves, 25 heads 
were brought to the Albanian Bolu-bashi at Ka- 
marina, who commanded the attack, and 6 men 
and 22 women threw themselves from the rocks, at 
the place where the precipice is highest, in prefer- 
ence to falling alive into the hands of their enemies. 
Several of the women who had infants, were seen 
to throw them over before they took the fatal 
leap. Last year again, in the month of July, a 
party of 400 Suliotes, under Botzari, sent over by 
the Russians to assist the Beys of Tzamuria in 
their war with Aly, stood a siege here, in con- 
junction with as many Tzamidhes, for six weeks, 
against a large force sent against them by the 
Vezir; they capitulated, on condition being per- 
mitted to return with their arms into Tzami. 

The meteris of the Suliotes are still seen on the 
weak points of the cliffs, which surround the hill 
on all sides, and particularly near a winding road 
which ascends through the cliffs, from the deserted 
monastery of Zalongo to its metdkhi of ἽΑγιος Tak- 
aoyne, or St. Michael, which is situated in the 
middle of the summit, and is still occupied by two 
or three monks. The monastery stands just under 
the cliffs at the western extremity of the hill; from 


v. | EPIRUS. 247 


which point the tabular, though sloping summit, 
which is of an oval form, rises gradually to the 
opposite extremity, where it terminates in a natu- 
ral citadel, 200 yards long from north to south, 
and 35 broad. All the summit around the me- 
tokhi is covered with low oaks. No remains of 
Hellenic architecture are to be seen on this height, 
though it commands, at a distance not greater 
than the length of the hill itself, the eastern ex- 
tremity of the Acropolis of an ancient city of great 
extent. 

This Acropolis occupies a level about 1000 yards 
long, and one-fourth at the utmost of that breadth, 
and which is surrounded by low cliffs on every 
side, except to the north, where it is still better 
fortified by high rocky summits, connected with 
the height of Zalongo by a lower crest or ridge ; on 
the farther extremity of which stands the monastery. 
The ruined walls of the Acropolis may be traced in 
their entire circuit, but are best preserved at the 
western end, and towards the upper cliffs. There 
were very few towers, and the masonry is so com- 
pletely of the second order, that I do not observe 
one regular course, or rectangular stone. In the 
highest part of the inclosure at the-foot of the 
cliffs, towards the western end, is a theatre in 
good preservation, of which the interior diameter 
is 50 feet; the rows of seats, which are 37 in 
number, are divided into two compartments by a 
precinctio, or διάζωμα, the lower containing 24 
rows, the upper 13. The cavea is greater than a 
semi-circle, and is divided into cunei, separated by 
steps. The outer circular wall of the cavea, and 


248 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


those which support the two extremities, are built 
of polygonal masonry, without any squared stones, 
and are well preserved. The scene or structure 
in front of the cavea was divided into two com- 
partments, of which the inner was equal in length 
to the inner diameter of the theatre, and the outer 
half that length; both were about 24 feet in breadth. 
Two immense fragments of 
tock, which have fallen 
from the cliffs above, are 
lying on the cavea; this 
| GOR accident is said to have 
-- happened not many years 
ago'. | 

On the descent from hence to the western ex- 
tremity of the Acropolis, near where it terminates 
in an angle, is a subterraneous building, which the 
peasants call the Vasildspito, or King’s House. 
Its plan resembles, on a small scale, that of the 
tombs of the kings at Egyptian Thebes, and it was 
intended probably for a similar purpose; but in- 
stead of being hewn out of the rock, it is con- 
structed of masonry. A passage, nineteen feet in 
length and five feet in breadth, with a curved roof 
one foot and a half high, leads to a chamber nine 
feet nine inches square, and having a similar roof 
five feet seven inches in height. The arches are 
not constructed on the principles of the Roman 
arch, but are hollowed out of horizontal courses of 





"Mr. Hughes, on the au- the south-eastern extremity of 
thority of Mr. Jones, says that the ruins, which was not seen 
there is another theatre towards _ either by Mr. Hughes or myself. 


v. | EPIRUS. 249 


stone: the interior of the arch is plastered, and is 
adorned with a small cornice in the same mate- 
rial at the bottom of the curve. The architrave of 
the outer entrance is formed of a single stone seven 
feet long. The passage and chamber, but parti- 
cularly the latter, are obstructed with stones and 
rubbish ; so that in no place the surface of the 
ground is more than six feet below the bottom of 
the arch. There is an excavation of earth before 
the door ; and the upper surface of the roof, which 
was probably in former times entirely covered 
with earth, is now partly visible on the outside. 
These seem to be the effects of a search which 
has been made for treasure. Upon the roof lie 
several stones in the form of segments of a circle, 
belonging apparently to some circular building of 
about ten feet in diameter. Not far from this sub- 
terraneous building there is a vaulted postern- 
gate in the wall, the arch of which is formed by 
concave stones, as in the Vasiléspito; but in this 
instance the concave parts of the two upper stones 
do not meet, and the top is completed by a flat 
stone’. The wall is here entirely of the second 
order. 

The principal gate of this fortress, which is still 
in good preservation, is in the western front, be- 
tween the theatre and Vasildspito. It is flanked 
on either side by a square tower, in one of which 
stands a sorus, formed of a single stone with an 
operculum, which has been removed just enough 


* 1 have since remarked the same kind of construction in 
some arched gates in Acarnania. 


250 EPIRUS. [| CHAP. 


to admit of an examination of the contents of 
the tomb and of an abstraction of them. Below 
the theatre are many rectangular foundations, all 
of polygonal masonry, and apparently belonging 
to very large buildings. In some places the an- 
cient streets may be traced, crossing one another 
at right angles. The circuit of the fortress is up- 
wards of a mile, and that of the city could not 
have been less than three miles; for though I 
cannot exactly trace the inclosure of the exterior 
town towards the south, a piece of wall, which 
crosses the slope of the mountain ten minutes be- 
low Kamarina, serves to mark the extent in that 
direction. Along the foot of the wall, between the 
great gate and Kamarina, and particularly in a 
spot immediately behind the village, are many 
tombs of an ordinary kind, seven to nine feet long, 
and three or four wide. They were either hewn 
in the rock, and covered with three massy pieces 
of stone, or where the soil was earthy, had sides 
constructed of four fragments of stone set edge- 
ways, with a covering of similar slabs. Having 
caused four of these tombs to be opened, I found 
in the first a great number of broken vases and 
bones, three or four small lachrymatories, as they 
are commonly called, and several long rectan- 
gular pieces of iron, one-tenth of an inch thick, 
and covered with gold leaf. The second tomb, 
though it had no appearance of having ever been 
opened, produced nothing, not even bones: a part 
of its cover and all the body of the tomb was cut 
out of the rock. The third, which was also hewn 
out of the solid rock, produced fragments, but not 
12 


v.| EPIRUS. 251 


many, of skulls and bones, with coarse vases of the 
usual forms, together with fragments of utensils 
made of lead, and a circular mirror of copper or 
mixed metal, six inches in diameter, placed within 
a covering of thinner metal; the lustre is still 
perfect on the side which has been protected by 
the covering. The opposite side has a rim three- 
eighths of an inch high, and the handle has an 
ornamented border. The same tomb contained 
also a leaden box two inches and one-eighth high, 
and one inch and three-eighths in diameter, shaped 
like the frustum of a cone, and having a button 
serving for a handle in the centre of the lid. As 
the labourers believed that the box contained 
jewels, and were afraid perhaps of an avania, | 
opened it in their presence: nothing remained in 
it but some earth, amidst which were two or three 
shells of a minute kind of snail. The mirror, and 
the box which once contained probably some oint- 
ment or perfume, show the tomb to have been that 
of a female. In the fourth sepulchre were found 
two or three vases, and some more of the orna- 
ments of iron and gold above-mentioned. The 
speculum was placed vertically at the feet of the 
deceased: the vases were found in every part of 
the tombs, and are all sepbniae απ ὦ 

of the most ordinary 


kind of Greek pottery. : 
The annexed was the : 
only form among them | : 


that is not very com- 
monly found in Greece. 
This great city I take to have been Cassope, or 


"ϑοηοτ 9 


252 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


the city of the Cassopei, who occupied the mari- 
time country between Thesprotia and the Ambracic 
Gulf, and bordered on the territory of Nicopolis' ; 
for although in the time of Scylax the Cassopzi 
dwelt κωμηδὸν, or in small towns, it is very pro- 
bable that the most advantageously situated of 
those towns became subsequently the head of the 
nation, when the Cassopzei arose to such power as 
to obtain Pandosia and some other places in the 
ancient Thesprotia®. The Acropolis, therefore, of 
which the masonry indicates so remote an anti- 
quity, may have been the Ken, older than the 
time of Scylax, and the lower city may have been 
added at that later period to which the coins of 
the Cassopzi have the appearance of belonging. 
That this people had a capital city, is shown by 
Diodorus, who, in relating an expedition of Lycis- 
cus, commander of the forces of Cassander, against 
Alcetas, king of Epirus, in the year B.C. 312, 
states that Lyciscus, marching from Acarnania into 
Epirus, pitched his camp near the city Cassopia ὃ. 
Alcetas, after having sent his two sons, Alexander 
and Teucer, to collect forces, advanced to meet 
Lyciscus ; but his Epirotes having passed over 
to the enemy before the reinforcements arrived, 


* Mera δὲ Θεσπρωτίαν Kao- 
/ ᾽ \ 3] Ἂς , ~ δὲ 
σωπία ἐστὶν ξθνος" οἰκοῦσι OF 
--- = ~ \ 
οὗτοι κατὰ κώμας" παροικοῦσι δὲ 
- e 4 xX ᾽ \ 
Οὗτοι ἕως εἰς τὸν ᾿Ανακτορικον 
κόλπον. ---- ϑουγαχ in Κασσω- 
παῖοι. 
Οἰκοῦσι δὲ τοῖς μὲν ἐν δεξιᾷ 
εἰσπλέουσι τῶν Ελλήνων AKap- 


νᾶνες 


ων . ἐν ἀριστερᾷ δὲ ἡ 
Νικόπολις καὶ τῶν ᾿ἮἬ πειρώτων 
οἱ Κασσωπαῖοι μεχρὶ τοῦ μυχοῦ 
τοῦ kara ᾿Αμβρακίαν.---Θἴταθο, 
p- 325. 

2 Demosth. in Orat. de Ha- 
lonneso. 

ὁ περὶ Κασσωπίαν πόλιν ..---- 


Diodor. |. 19, ο. 88. 


v. | EPIRUS. 253 


he fled to Eurymene, where he was joined by 
his sons. He then fought two battles with the 
enemy, and in the former had the advantage ; 
but the Macedonians having prevailed in the 
latter, he took refuge with his two sons in ano- 
ther place of strength, leaving Eurymene to be 
taken and destroyed by Lyciscus ; soon after which 
Cassander, arriving in Epirus, made peace with 
Alcetas, and entered into, an alliance with him. It 
seems not improbable from these circumstances, 
that Eurymene stood in the vale of the Upper 
Acheron, towards Lakia, Variadhes, or Tervitziana ; 
for the valley of the Acheron, below Suli, together 
with the country extending from thence to Za- 
longo, appears to have been occupied by the cities 
of Elea, Buchetium, Cichyrus, Pandosia, Batie, 
and Elateia. Agriapidhia was probably the λιμὴν, 
or harbour of the Cassopzi. 

Captain lanaki has an annual income of about 
1000 piastres, now equivalent to 65/. sterling. He 
is authorized to deduct 300 piastres for himself, 
and 50 for each of his men, from the Vezir’s re- 
venue, which he collects; the remainder of his in- 
come is derived from fees on his arbitration of the 
disputes which arise in the district under his 
charge. My travelling companion, Kyr Petros, 
of Korytza, considers Captain lanaki an object of 
envy; and with reason,—for although Peter is the 
Vezir’s chief architect and engineer, he has served 
in his present capacity for five years without re- 
ceiving a para, although constantly employed in 
superintending the building of some castle or serai 
for the Vezir or his sons. His property and family 


254 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


are at Korytza, where by special favour he is now 
and then allowed to stay a few days. He relates 
that when he was excavating the ground for the 
new serai in the castle of Ioannina, a stone was 
found inscribed in honour of Thomas Ἡ γούμενος, 
benefactor of lodnnina. Having reported his dis-' 
covery to the Vezir, his highness said, ‘‘ Go read 
all the old histories, and come to-morrow morning 
and let me know whose monument it is.”” This 
same benefactor of Ioannina is said to have been a 
much worse tyrant than Aly himself; and one 
among several examples which show that many of 
the Christian chieftains of Albanian and Servian 
race, with their military followers, exercised a do- 
minion over the subject population of Greece not 
less oppressive than the Turkish. Kyr Petros 
states that his native town and the neighbouring 
one of Moskhopoli formerly contained five or six 
thousand houses, but that the emigrations which 
have followed the tyranny of the Pashas have re- 
duced them to less than eight hundred. The dis- 
tress of the Christian population throughout the 
diocese of [oannina, he ascribes in great measure 
to the extravagance of the bishop, who has loaded 
the see with debts to such a degree, that at his 
death the mansup will hardly find a purchaser ; 
while, meantime, his flock is fleeced to pay the 
immoderate interest, without which money cannot 
be raised in this country. 

July 8.—This morning, having set my watch to 
Turkish time ' to accommodate my companions, 


* Though it is generally form to local customs, there is 
better for a traveller to con- some inconvenience in Turkish 


νυ] 


we begin the descent from Kamarina at 10, and in 
ten minutes arrive at some remains of the exterior 
walls of the ancient city, near a mill turned by the 
stream, which has its rise in the village. At a 
quarter of an hour short of Luro, we cross the 
mouth of the valley of Kutzandpulo, and at twelve 
arrive at the house of the Proestés of Luro, which 
village is situated in a low unhealthy situation, near 
a square castle of the Vezir, now in a ruinous state. 
All the hills around are clothed with oaks. Coarse 
but good blankets are made here, and in some of 
the neighbouring villages: a piece of seven feet 
by four feet and a half costs ten piastres. In the 
afternoon, at 8.53, we proceed over a desolate 
plain overgrown with brambles and bushes, and at 
9.12 arrive at the foot of a rocky mountain, from 
which issue some copious streams of water, forming 
a large pond : it is very deep and pellucid, abounds 
in fish, and is closely shaded around the margin 
with trees and shrubs. To the right are marshes 
extending for a great distance towards the sea; 


EPIRUS. 255 


time, as the watch cannot be 
kept correct without daily at- 
tention. It would seem, how- 
ever, to be a natural mode of 
measuring time, being followed 
by so many nations. The 
Turkish method differs only 
from the Italian in dividing 
the day into two twelves, in- 
stead of reckoning to twenty- 
four ; so that sunset is always 
twelve o'clock. One of the 
commonest questions which a 


native of the Levant who 
wears a watch puts to a Frank 
is, “Αἱ what hour is mid- 
day?” This he asks, that he 
may set his watch. The pea- 
sant without a watch generally 
asks, “* How many hours is it 
to sunset ?”—this being ob- 
viously the principal question 
for the labourer. To the Turk 
also it is important; as the 
afternoon’s prayer is three 
hours before sunset. 


256 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


and near the sources a kula for the protection of 
the pass, with the remains of a Hellenic tower, 
which doubtless served the same purpose. 

A paved road here passes over the foot of the 
mountain, descends beyond the lake again into 
the plain, and then turns to the left through an 
opening between two mountains, in which stands 
the village of Kanja’. The aqueduct of Nicopolis 
was conducted through this opening, as appears by 
some remains of it visible on the slope of the hill 
to the left, as we pass through Kanza at 9.33: we 
- then enter a small plain surrounded by moun- 
tains, and continue to ascend through it until 
turning a point of hill we open the view of an 
extensive valley, included between two parallel 
ridges of hills, of which those on the east are richly 
clothed with trees. To our left a woody height is 
surrounded with remains of the inclosure of the 
Hellenic city which possessed this beautiful vale, 
consisting only of the foundations of town walls, 
chiefly of the third order. The site is now called 
Kastri. 

At a distance of one -hour and a half from 
Kanza is Lélovo, situated on the rocky foot of 
the western hills. Around the village are plan- 
tations of olives, and below it fruit trees and 
gardens, extending into the valley, which stretches 
four or five miles farther, terminating inland in 
heights which separate it from the valleys watered 
by the upper tributaries of the Acheron, and of the 
eastern branch of the river of Luro. | 

Lélovo contains 150 or 200 houses, much dis- 


1 Kava. 


v.| EPIRUS. ΩΝ 


4 


persed. Papa Nikola is both priest and proestés, 
and has a large house with yard and outhouses, 
erected with considerable expense, but utterly in 
want of the most vulgar comforts. He has the 
reputation of being a tyrant, and a complaint has 
lately been preferred against him by the village, 
but the Pasha seldom listens to such representa- 
tions, unless to impose a fine upon the person 
complained of. The principal church, which was 
built about six years ago, is adorned within with 
costly gilding and painting. This is a vanity 
which Aly readily allows the Greeks to indulge 
in, and though he exacts something in permitting 
them to rebuild or repair their churches, he is 
very moderate on these occasions, and desirous of 
encouraging the practice. Lélovo contains the 
ruined serai of a Turkish Bey who once possessed 
a considerable property here in land, but was 
stripped of it by the Vezir, and now lives in 
misery at loannina. All the better houses have 
spacious yards, in which the people delight to sit 
at this season, on a rude sofa raised upon sticks, 
and covered with fern leaves. These, when the 
leaves are fresh, are cool and agreeable, but they 
soon become dry and swarming with fleas, like 
every place in this country in summer where man 
inhabits. . 

July 9.—At 9.40, Turkish time, we begin to » 
cross the valley in a south-eastern direction, and 
having traversed it, as well as the range of hills 
which border it on the east, we arrive at 10.45 at 
the issue of a large stream which flows to the 
river of St. George. We then ascend an uncul- 

VOL. I. - 


8 ΄. EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


tivated valley overgrown with bushes, and having 
passed through a wood of large oaks, fall a little 
beyond the summit of a low ridge, into the road 
from Kanza to Pendepigadhia, which here pursues 
the side of a woody and rocky height, about 100 
yards above the river of St. George. The ruined 
channel of the aqueduct of Nicopolis follows the 
side of our road. Steep rocky heights covered 
with wood rise from the opposite bank of the 
stream. This is the main branch of the river, 
which joins the Gulf two or three miles to ‘the 
northward of Nicopolis, and is usually called the 
river of Luro, perhaps from being collected into 
one body in the marshes of Luro. The river of 
St. George, although considerably smaller than 
the Arcadian Ladon, in volume of water, is 
broader and very rapid, falling with a great noise 
in a continued cataract over the rocks. This 
peculiarity leads me to believe that it was an- 
ciently named Charadrus ; for although no author 
mentions any river besides the Arachthus in this 
part of Epirus, Charadrus was ἃ natural name for 
such a rapid stream; and as Polybius twice al- 
ludes to a town of Charadra', which in one pas- 
sage he clearly shows to have been on the road 
from Ambracus to the Strait of Actium, there is 
every reason to believe that it was situated on this 
stream towards the gulf, and that it took its name 
from the river. Some ruins on its bank, at Rogis 
to the eastward of Kanza, mark probably the site 
of Charadra, as some remains of Hellenic walls 


* \‘Polyb. 1.4, οὐ θῶ. 1..28;0e09. 
12 


v.| EPIRUS. 259 


are reported to be there mixed with is ruins of a 
town of the Byzantine empire. 

At 11.40 we descend upon the soe bank of the 
river, which ‘is here overshadowed by very. large 
plane trees, and after following it) for a few 
minutes, arrive at a spot where the larger portion 
of the river issues from a rocky opening, under 
the foot of the opposite hill, and joins’ the 
direct branch, which falls into it, over a ledge of 
rocks in a wide cascade. The subterranean river 
is said to be the discharge of a katavothra. A 
little higher up is a conjunction of several small 
streams which sink under the rocks. We continue 
to follow the right bank of the ravine, amidst plane 
trees, and soon arrive at a natural bridge formed 
by the rocks in the river’s bed, under which the 
water is concealed for the distance of 100 yards. 
Towards the upper end, a part of the subterraneous 
current may be perceived through a lateral open- 
ing in the rocks, and several small tributaries 
tumble over them, flowing in numerous rills among 
the planes, until just above the natural bridge 
they unite and disappear in a great whirlpool. 
Two hundred yards above this spot occurs the 
junction of two other principal branches ; that to 
the right, which is the larger though not so broad 
as the other, rises near Potamia, and flows through 
the plain of Khierasovo and Koliadhes, the other 
comes from Ferekisi, where we crossed it near its 
sources in the road from loannina to Varia. A 
little above the junction is the ruined aqueduct of 
Nicopolis, built across the ravine of the Ferekisi 
stream, which rushes through the arches of the 

s 2 


260 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


aqueduct over a stony bed. The beautiful effect 
of this ruin, fringed with shrubs, and which in the 
middle of the ravine is 70 feet high, with a double 
tier of arches, 18 feet wide, standing between two 
rocky, extremely abrupt, and woody mountains, 
and stretching over a rapid torrent shaded with 
enormous plane trees, it is easier to imagine than 
describe. The ruin is commonly known by no 
other name than that of craic καμάραις, or the 


arches. 
Ν 
a 
Ὁ ς αδρς 





daa 
! 





οὔ 
| 


G 


oO 


Besides the principal ruin there are remains on 
either bank of another row of arches, which crossed 
the ravine obliquely a little higher up the stream, 
and met the former in an acute angle, from whence 
began the conduit which was constructed along 
the side of the hills nearly as far as Luro. Across 
the valley of Luro it was probably again necessary 
to raise the aqueduct upon arches, though I did 
not perceive any vestiges of them. In the plain 
of Lamari, which the aqueduct crossed, long rows 
of the piers, as I have already mentioned, still 
remain, and the aqueduct may be traced, from 
thence to the western end of the hill of Mikhalitzi, 
and from thence to Nicopolis. The length was about 
thirty miles. Not a vestige remains in the bed of 
the river of the piers of the aqueduct Bc, nor 


v. | EPIRUS. 261 


can I discover from what sources it was supplied. 
The aqueduct ac was filled by a stream which 
issues from the side of the mountain, at a church 
of St. George. In order to reach that place we 
are obliged to return down the right bank to cross 
the united river at the natural bridge, then the 
branch from Potamia, and lastly the stream from 
the church, which falls over the side of the moun- 
tain with the utmost rapidity, and supplies deri- 
vations for turning some mills. The source is in 
the mountain behind the mills, and issues in the 
church itself. When the aqueduct was in use, 
the water was of course conducted into it by an 
artificial channel ; it now falls the whole height of 
the source above the bed of the river in less than 
half a mile. From the church we ascend in five 
minutes to the village of St. George ', where we 
had intended to rest during the meridian hours, 
but find that it has been abandoned by the in- 
habitants on the news of our approach.  Re- 
crossing therefore the Potamia branch, and pass- 
ing for half an hour over some heights, we enter 
the valley of Potamia, at the end of which, on the 
right, but not in view, is the village of Sfeliniki ; 
and directly in front of us the summit of the 
Xerovuni, or Kelberini range, which is just above 
Kometzadhes. Having passed some copious sources 
which join the river, we follow the foot of the hill 
from whence they issue, and reach the bank of the 
river, which is here a deep and muddy stream 
flowing along a marshy valley covered with rice 
fields. In an hour from St. George, we arrive at 
* “Aye Γεώργιος. 


262 EPIRUS. [CHAP. Vv. 


Koliadhes, a village of fifteen houses, now aban- 
doned by its inhabitants on account of the bad air 
and gnats. p mT a 
All the villages in the valley have summer resi- 
ieee on the surrounding hills, a common prae- 
tice both in Greece and Asia Minor. ‘The summer 
village of Koliadhes I have already noticed as 
being in sight, to the left of the high road from 
Arta to Ioannina, between Kometzadhes and Pen- 
depigadhia. Khierasovo 15 situated in the valley 
of the river of Potamia, at the foot of the moun- 
tain immediately over against Koliadhes; between 
these and Potamia, near which the river rises, 
there are six or eight other small villages inhabited 
in the season by cultivators of the rice-grounds, 
but which are all now empty. At a pyrgo at 
Koliadhes, where we halt, a Papas visits me, the 
only person left in the place, and who is losing 
his sight by a disease of the eyes exactly resem- 
bling the ophthalmia of Egypt. Δί 9 we set out 
again, continue to follow the left bank of the 
river, and the foot of the hills, from whence issue 
several sources, and at 10 quit the valley, which 
stretches considerably higher up, and turn to the 
right up an opening of the mountain, following a 
torrent which in some places is thickly shaded 
with stunted plane trees, until at 11.20 we arrive 
at the head of it at Pende Pigadhia. Pursuing 
from hence the ordinary road from Arta to loannina, 
we arrive at the Khan of St. Dhimitri at 2.35, 
lighted for the last two hours by the moon. 


CHAPTER VI. 


EPIRUS, MACEDONIA. 


Ancient remains near Dhramisiis—Kalarytes—Syrako— Viliza 
Matziki—Mount Kakardhista—Prospect from the summit— 
Departure from Ioannina for Grevena—Dhrysko—Dhipotamo 
Gotzista—Khrysovitza—Tria Khania—Métzovo— Beratori— 
Pass of Djankfrtara—Mount Cittwm—March of Perseus from 
Elimeia to Stratus—Milid—Krania—Kieperd—River Vene- 
tiko—Grevené—River Vistritza, or Injékara, Haliacmon— 
Siatista—Klistira of Siatista—Sarighioli— Tyrissa—Camps of 
Scipio and Domitius. 


Jury 14.—Having received intimation of some 
remarkable ruins at the foot of Mount Olytzika, 1 
proceed thither this afternoon. The road, leaving 
Rapsista’ a quarter of a mile on the left, enters an 
opening in the ridge which borders the plain of 
Ioannina on the west, passes to the left of Kos- 
mira’, a village situate in the midst of vineyards ; 
and after having crossed the ridge, descends into 
a narrow valley at the foot of Olytzika, on the side 
of which mountain are situated the four villages of 
Milyngus *, Alepukhori*, Tjerkovista*, Dramet- 
jas, or Dhramishis*: in that order from south- 
east to north-west, and consisting of dispersed 
houses prettily situated among gardens on the 
mountain side. The summit of Mount Olytzika, 
like most of the high mountains of this country, is 


* Ῥαψήστα. ἢ Τζερκοβίστα. 
* Κοσμιρα. ° στοὺς Τραμετζοὺς, Δραμι- 
* στοὺς Μιλυγγούς. σιούς. 


4 


᾿Αλεπουχώρι. 


264 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


a bare white limestone rock, deeply furrowed by 
torrents. Below this naked region there is a belt 
of firs, and then a cultivable slope. 

The ruins, called as usual the Paledkastro, are 
in the valley immediately below Alepukhori, but 
nearer to Dhramisits. Here are the walls of a 
Hellenic fortress, crowning the summit of a small 
rocky height, which rises from the lowest part of 
the vale. The form is an irregular quadrangle, 
and the inclosed space is not more than equal to 

a square of 550 feet. Within the enclosure is a 
small subterraneous building, supported by rude 
pilasters, and formerly covered with a roof formed 
of flat beams of stone, which have now fallen in. 
The walls of the fortress, flanked with towers, are 
extant in some places to the height of 15 or 20 feet, 
and are from 10 to 15 feet in thickness, according 
as the ground required a greater or less defence. 
The towers are not uniform in size or shape, nor 
are the intervals between them equal: the faces of 
those at the angles are from 25 to 35 feet long ; 
in the intermediate towers they are not so long. 
The flanks in general are about 15 feet. The irre- 
gularity of the fortress, although caused in some | 
measure by the nature of the ground, seems to 
have been partly adopted for the sake of obtaining 
a convenient site for an immense theatre, facing 
the south, and separated only, at the back, from 
one of the angles of the fortress by a passage 
271 feet in width. Like the theatre of Sparta, and 
many others in Greece, the middle part was exca- 
vated in the hill, and the two ends supported by 
two great masses of masonry, faced with rectan- 
gular stones, nicely fitted without cement. There 


VI. | EPIRUS. 265 


were 65 or 66 rows of seats!, of which the two 
lowest were cut in the rock. As usual in Greek 
theatres, the seats were divided into horizontal 
portions by precinctions or corridors, and vertically 
_by cunei, separated from each other by radiating 
scale, or flights of steps, each step being half the 
height of a seat. There were two precinctions, 
dividing the seats into three divisions, besides a 
third corridor of the same kind at the top of the 
theatre: in the upper division were 22 seats, and 
there were perhaps an equal number in each of 
the two lower; but there is some difficulty in as- 
certaining this fact, for though the seats all exist, 
their component blocks are very much displaced 
by the effects of vegetation or other causes, and 
are lying in confusion. In the upper division of 
the seats there were twice as many scale as in the 
two lower divisions, as may generally be observed in 
Greek theatres. Two broad flights of steps con- 
ducted from the exterior level, on either side of the 
proscenium, to the middle diazoma. The interior 
diameter or length of the orchestra is about 80 feet, 
and each wing being about 190 feet, the total 
diameter is 460 feet nearly: dimensions which 
place this theatre among the largest in Greece, 
such as those of Athens, Megalopolis, Sparta, and 
Argos. It differs, however, from all I have seen, 
either in Greece or Asia sufficiently preserved to 
afford a comparison, in having a cavea which, 
very little, if at all, exceeds the semicircie. In 
proportion to its diameter, therefore, it was inca- 


* This, and two or three ποῦ obtained until I made an 
other particulars of the theatre excavation in the year 1809. 
and temple here given, were 


266 


EPIRUS. 


[| CHAP. 


pable of containing so many spectators as some of 


those above mentioned’. 


There are some founda- 


tions of the constructions belonging to the scene, 
which it would be interesting to excavate. 


Hellenic Ruins near Dhramisiius. 


= 





UA 


50 100 200 400 


1 Taking 1ft. 4in. for each 
sitting, this being nearly the 
breadth marked in the greater 
theatre of Pompeii, the Epirote 
theatre might contain 18,000 


persons seated, and 20,000 


—— aes 
Temple 


Gale 
N 
᾿ 
Temple 
Gate 
oaks \ 
600 800 1000 feet. 


upon occasion ; which renders 
credible the three myriads, 
sometimes assembled in the 
Dionysiac theatre of Athens, 
according to a passage in the 
Banquet of Plato. 


VI. | EPIRUS. 267 


On the north-eastern side of the theatre, and 
below the adjacent wall of the fortress, an enclo- 
sure, about two-thirds as large as the fortress itself, 
was surrounded on the other sides bya wall not 
more than half as thick as that of the fortress.. It 
appears to have had an entrance by the side of a 
tower at its north-eastern extremity, and to have 
been separated by a narrow passage from the 
eastern side of the theatre. The slightness of the 
wall, and the remains of two temples in the en- 
closed space, evidently show that it was a sacred 
temenus, of which the theatre may have formed ἃ 
part. Of one temple, which stood on higher 
ground than the other, and not far from the theatre, 
one or two columns only remain i situ; but of the 
lower temple, which is near the north-eastern end 
of the peribolus, or wall of the temenus, the lower 
parts of most of the columns are extant amidst the 
ruins. It was a tetrastyle, with at least 10 co- 
lumns in the sides, about 70 feet long, and 25 
broad, built of a coarse limestone, which is much 
injured by time. At one end ofthe temple, among 
the ruins, lies a piece of the frieze, ornamented 
with small capita bovis, connected by. garlands 
formed of an intermixture of the vine with oak- 
leaves, acorns, and ears. of corn: the relief is very 
low, and roughly executed. 

Below the temenus was a third enclosure, smaller 
than the former, in the shape of an irregular quad- 
rangle, and enclosed to the southward by a wall 
still slighter than that of the peribolus. Never- 
theless, a part of it still stands to a considerable 
height ; and at its termination to the south-east 
was a large tower, with the remains of a gate 


268 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


on one side of it, and on the other a long narrow 
space in the lowest part of the valley, enclosed 
with the remains of a slight wall. But neither 
here, nor in any other direction, can I find any 
traces of town walls, such as were universally em- 
ployed in the cities of Greece. Nor was this 
narrow valley, deficient in water, and closely sur- 
rounded by hills, such a situation as the ancients 
usually chose for their towns. As well from these 
circumstances therefore, as from the nature of the 
buildings, I conceive them to have composed a 
‘Ieoov, and place of public assembly, protected by 
a fortress', the dimensions of the latter not be- 
ing even those of a κώμη, or small town. The 
position is so nearly central in the country of the 
Molossi, that it was probably a place of common 
sacrifice and political union for the use of all the 
towns of that division of Epirus. The valley is 
now chiefly cultivated with maize. The waters 
flow to the Kalama. Variadhes is about three 
hours to the southward, over the roots of Mount 
Olytzika. 

Aug. 4.—The afternoon thunder-showers, which 
fell at Ioannina two days out of three during the 
months of June and July, and still oftener on the 
neighbouring mountains, have ceased for the last 
ten days. The heat reflected from the hill of St. 
George, on which the upper part of the town 
stands, as well as from Mount Mitzikéli, which 
has the effect of an immense wall on the opposite 
side of the lake, is unmitigated, except by the 
maestrale, which the former hill in great measure 


* φρουρίον, or τεῖχος. 


VI. | EPIRUS. 269 


intercepts. The thermometer, about 3 p.m., ranges 
from 90° to 98° in the coolest places. The want 
of rain to carry off the accumulation of filth, which 
nothing else ever removes from a Turkish town, 
begins to infect the air; and the muddy edges of 
the lake send forth exhalations which render that 
quarter unhealthy. 

This evening at sunset I set out for Kalarytes, 
one of the Vlakhiote towns of Mount Pindus, to 
the south-east of Ioannina; and in less than three 
quarters of an hour arrive at a khan, near the 
small village of Katzika, which is situated near 
the south-western angle of the Lake of Loannina, 
not far from the foot of the hill of Kastritza. From 
hence, after reposing for a few hours in a dirty 
cabin, adjacent to the shop of the Khan, we pro- 
ceed at half-past three, tempo Francese, as the Ita- 
lians and Levantines call the mode of reckoning 
used by French and English: follow the hill of 
Kastritza, which rises from the southern extremity 
of the lake; and leaving it on the left, then pass 
through a narrow opening between it and some 
heights which are connected with the range of Xero- 
vuni, into the valley of Barkumadhi', which sur- 
rounds Kastritza, and to the eastward of that height 
touches the lake. Crossing the southern end of 
this valley, and leaving Ardhomista* and two 
other small villages to the left, we ascend the 
ridge of Dhrysko, or Drysko*, which separates 
this plain from the vale of the river Arta. All the 
land in the plain of Barkumadhi still belongs to 


* Mrapkoupac.. ° Δρύσκος, Ντρύσκο. 
* ᾽Αρδομίστα. 


270 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


Turkish beys of loannina, no part of it having yet 
become a tyjiftlik of the Pasha. On the ascent of 
Drysko, we pass, at 5.15, a large monastery sur- 
rounded with oaks; named Eledkali, ‘which the 
monks have abandoned on account of the frequent 
passage of late of Albanian soldiers by ‘this road. 
At 6.50 we arrive at a chapel on the summit of 
the ridge ; descend by a steep and very bad road, 
and at 8 ford the river Arta at the junction of a 
torrent on the left bank, where amidst. barren 
mountains are a khan, some mills,: and ἃ few 
fields of maize. | iw.d 
A‘high narrow bridge crosses the river and ano- 
ther the torrent, but little use is made of them in this 
season. The river flows from hence through a very 
narrow vale to our right, and soon enters a deep 
ravine. To the left the snow-capped mountains, 
which stretch’ from K6nitza to Métzovo, are seen 
above Mount Mitzikéh. We now climb for an 
hour one of the steepest ridges of Pindus, as far as 
another khan under one of the highest peaks, which 
i never entirely free from snow, and on ‘the other 
side falls to Syrako. Having remained at this 
khan from 9.5 till 4.40, we begin to make the 
tour of the summit, passing round its southern ex- 
tremity, and leaving on the right a succession of 
cultivated slopes, with rocky intervals between 
them, which reach to the Arta. In these’ slopes 
are several mills, turned by torrents from the 
mountain. The heights, which rise abruptly from 
the opposite bank of the Arta, and connect Dhrysko 
with Mount Xerovuni, are well cultivated by the 
natives of twelve villages called the Katzano, or 


VI. | | EPIRUS. 271 


Tomaro khéria. At half an hour beyond the khan, 
the side of the mountain is covered with immense 
fragments of rock, and innumerable smaller pieces 
—the effects of the fall of a part of the mountain 
which occurred about twelve years ago. My com- 
panion, a Kalarytiote, states, that the previous fall 
of a portion, and the appearance of the rest, gave 
sufficient warning ; so that no damage ensued, ex- 
cept the destruction of the road. The ruin is half a 
mile in length, and the path through it winding 
and difficult. The immense rock of Djumérka’ 
now presents itself in face of us to the southward, 
the opening between which and the parallel range 
of Xerovini displays a fine view of the Gulf of 
Arta, with its shores and the mountains of Xeré- 
mero beyond it. On the nearest part of Tzumérka 
is seen the village of Pramanda’, and a cultivated 
tract, sloping northward to a large branch of the 
Arta, which before its junction with the main 
stream passes through a narrow gorge between two 
very high precipices.. This branch of the river’ is 
formed of three streams, one of which flows from 
Matziki, the middle from Viliza, the third and 
largest from Kalarytes and Syrako. We now cross 
over the ridge, of which we had been following 
the side, and αὐ 7.15 arrive at a small church 
of St. George, situated on a narrow summit, three 
or four miles to the southward of the peak which 
is above Syrako. The church commands a view 
of Syrako and Kalarytes, both covering slopes of 


* Τζουμέρκα. * Πράμαντα. 


272 ; EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


excessive steepness; the former just under the 
peak, the latter upon an insulated mountain, occu- 
pying a space between the ridge of Syrako and the 
still higher summits to the north and east, which 
form the central chain of Pindus. The third of 
the three streams above-mentioned passes between 
the two towns, which, although only two or three 
miles apart in a direct line, require as many hours 
to walk from the one to the other. Kalarytes, 
standing on the eastern side of its mountain below 
the summit, is hid by that summit from Syrako. 
Nothing can be more surprising than the sudden 
view of these two large towns on arriving at St. 
George, after travelling the whole day amidst pre- 
cipices, arid rocks, and desolation. It is particu- 
larly in the present season that the contrast 1s most 
remarkable ; for while the little patches of cultiva- 
tion within view, show nothing but a dry stubble, 
the gardens among which the houses of the two 
towns are dispersed, are maintained in the bright- 
est verdure by numerous rivulets originating in the 
towns, or a little above them, and which undoubt- 
edly guided the first settlers in their choice of the 
two positions. All the surrounding scenery consists 
of bare rocks or parched slopes, except to the south- 
ward, where a peak rising to the left of the fork of 
the Kalarytes and Arta rivers, is covered from a 
little below the summit to the base with a thick 
forest of firs, mixed in the lower region of the 
mountain with other trees, and thus forming a 
most beautiful object in front of Kalarytes. Seve- 
ral of the lower slopes in the ravines of the rivers 


VI. | _ EPIRUS. 273 


of Kalarytes and Syrako, are clothed with woods : 
but they form no decoration to the picture in the 
higher positions, being hidden by the depth and 
narrowness of the ravines ; so that in descending 
from St. George to the river of Syrako, I was sur- 
prised to find myself suddenly in a thick forest of 
linden, maple, cherry, horse-chestnut, oak, elm, 
ash, beech, sycamore, and hornbeam, mixed with 
cornel, holly, elder, hazel, and a variety of plants 
of lower growth. The hill is so steep that the de- 
scent occupies half an hour by a continued zigzag. 
At the bottom the stream bounds over the rocks 
with a loud noise, and in some places forms deep 
pools which abound in trout '; as all the neigh- 
bouring rivers are of a similar description, the 
Kalarytiotes are thus plentifully supplied with these 
fish in summer. They are most commonly taken by 
means of quick lime thrown into the head of the 
pool, which soon brings the intoxicated fish to the 
surface. In seasons of rain, nothing can resist the 
fury of the river: not long since, my Kalarytiote 
companion thus lost, in an instant, some mills and 
buildings which had given him a yearly rent of 
1000 piastres. At the bridge, the road to Syrako 
branches to the left up the right bank of the river, 
until it arrives at a point immediately below that 
town, from whence there is an ascent similar to 
that which we follow from the bridge to Kalarftes. 
The latter resembles exactly the descent from St. 
George, excepting that it is not so woody. Like 


: Πεστροφαίς. 
VOL. I. yb — 


274 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


the descent, it occupies half an hour. At 8.30 
we arrive in the upper part of the town. 

Kalarytes or Akalarrytes, and Syrako or Ser- 
raku‘, are two of the largest of the Vlakhiote 
villages, which in number about 500, and none 
very small, are dispersed throughout the moun- 
tains of Epirus, Thessaly, and Macedonia. Vlak- 
holivadho, near Oloséna, is reckoned the largest, 
and then Métzovo. We learn from the Byzantine 
history, that the Wlakhs, in Greek Bdayo or 
Βλαχιώταις, occupied so large a portion of Thessaly 
about the twelfth century, that the whole country 
was commonly known by the name of Μεγάλη 
Βλαχία, or Great Wallachia. But it is the tradi- 
tion of Kalarytes, that the Vlakhiotes have not 
been settled in this part of Pindus more than 250 
years, which is very credible, as it is not likely 
that they quitted the more fertile parts of Thessaly 
until they felt the oppression of the Turkish con- 
querors, and their inability to resist it. The 
removal has not been unfortunate, for their descend- 
ants have thereby enjoyed a degree of repose, 
and have obtained advantages which their former 
situation could hardly have admitted. They 
began by carrying to Italy the woollen cloaks, 
called Cappe, which are made in these moun- 
tains, and much used in Italy and Spain, as well 
as by the Greeks themselves. This opened the 
route to a more extended commerce: they now 
share with the Greeks in the valuable trade of 


1 Καλαρύταις, ᾿Ακαλαῤῥύταις. Συράκω, Leppaxov. 
ρ pp p pp 


VI. | EPIRUS. 275 


colonial produce between Spain or Malta and 
Turkey, and many are owners of both ship and 
cargo. The wealthier inhabitants are merchants, 
who have resided abroad many years in Italy, 
Spain, or the dominions of Austria or Russia, and 
who, after a long absence, return with the fruits of 
their industry to their native towns, which they 
thus enrich, and, in some degree, civilize. But 
they seldom return for permanent residence till 
late in life, being satisfied in the interval with 
two or three short visits. The middle classes pur- 
sue a similar course; but as their trafic seldom 
carries them so far from home as the higher order 
of merchants, they return more frequently, and 
many of them spend a part of every summer in 
their native place. These are chiefly shopkeepers 
in the towns of Turkey, or artisans, of whom the 
most numerous are tailors, and workers in gold, 
silver, and copper. They excel in mounting pis- 
tols and musquets:in the Albanian taste, in making 
flisans or silver coffee cups, and in embroidering 
Albanian dresses. The poorer householders are 
chiefly carriers or shepherds. At Syrako are a 
few goldsmiths, who work chiefly at Prévyza and 
Lefkadha; but there the great body of the people 
are owners of sheep, shepherds, or carriers. The 
gardens, and the small quantity of arable land 
which surrounds these towns, are chiefly cultivated 
by the women, who reap the harvest as well as 
perform all the household work, and spin. Hera- 
clides Ponticus remarks, that in Athamania the 
men tend the flocks, and the women till the 
T 2 


276 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


ground’; and we are here, if not in Athamania, 
at least very near it, and in a country altogether 
similar. 

As some of the retired merchants have houses 
at Ioannina, and the shepherds drive their flocks 
in that season to the plains and maritime districts, 
Kalarytes in that season is chiefly inhabited by 
women, children, and priests; and as the snow 
lies sometimes five months in the town, or at no 
great distance from it, there is little communica- 
tion with the surrounding country, and it is cus- 
tomary for every family to lay in a winter provision 
of rice, flour, oil, saltfish, and firewood. 

Kalarytes and Syrako contain between five and 
six thousand souls, besides those who are abroad, 
amounting to about a tenth of the population. 
Each town has its iatrés, or medical attendant, 
receiving a fixed salary from the public, and its 
dhaskalo, or master of literal Greek ; but the latter 
teaches scarcely any thing more than the rudi- 
ments of the language, the illiterate parents taking 
little interest in a proficiency, which seems to them 
unnecessary, unless their children are destined to 
the priesthood ; in fact, it adds little to their pro- 
spect of success in life. 

The lower classes of Kalarytes (and the same is 
said to occur in all the villages of these mountains) 
preserve, in a remarkable manner, the ancient 
spirit of independence for which the Greeks were 


“Ev τῇ ᾿Αθαμάνων χώρᾳ μουσι δὲ ot ἄνδρες. Heracl. 
γεωργοῦσι μὲν αἱ γυναῖκες, vé- Pont. in ᾿Αθαμάνων. 


VI. | EPIRUS. 277 


so remarkable. They will not easily submit to be 
household servants: and heads of families, who have 
not been abroad, are generally served by their wives 
and daughters; those who have been accustomed 
to different fashions abroad generally take servants 
from loaénnina or Trikkala. A Corfiote, who came 
to establish himself here as physician, could not 
for a long time procure any one to wait upon him, 
because he made use of a bell, which they said 
was fit only for sheep and goats. On the other 
hand their wives are perfect slaves. 

As a community, their peaceable pursuits have 
been adverse to their retention of that indepen- 
dence which their ancestors conquered and long 
enjoyed in Northern Greece, and to which their 
almost inaccessible retreat in this part of Mount 
Pindus would have been extremely favourable, 
had they been as martial a people as many of the 
Greek and Albanian mountaineers. But they 
have made little or no resistance to Aly Pasha, 
who has been inclined to treat them with lenity, 
as well from that circumstance, as because the 
revenue of Kalarytes, and of some of the other 
principal towns, is an appanage of the Validé Sul- 
tan, who with her kiaya still enjoys great power 
at the supreme court. Aly regularly accounts, 
therefore, for the dues to the imperial treasury, 
and has hitherto endeavoured to avoid all flagrant 
cause of complaint from the rayahs of these places. 
The conquest of Suli, however, has of late ren- 
dered him bolder, and the people now complain 
of the angaria, or gratuitous labour of men and 
horses, for which they have often been called upon 


278 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


since the Pasha began to build the castle of Kiafa. 
The 14,000 piastres, which was formerly the 
amount of the contributions of Kalarytes, have 
gradually been raised to 45,000, and the town has 
been lately obliged to increase its public debt by 
100 purses, which they have borrowed from Turks 
of loannina at an interest of 15 per cent. My 
host informs me that he pays 170 piastres a year, 
equal to 12/. or 134. sterling, in direct contribu- 
tions. 

The corn-fields of Kalarytes, which are chiefly 
on the northern and eastern sides of the town, and 
on the face of the opposite mountain in that direc- 
tion, produce a sufficiency of wheat in favourable 
years for about four months’ consumption. In the 
present year the harvest has been very bad, and 
has scarcely returned double the seed. It is a 
bearded wheat, with short straw, and makes ex- 
cellent bread. They are supplied with maize, wine, 
and oil, from Arta, wheaten flour from Trikkala, 
and a few articles, chiefly European, from loan- 
nina. Some of the narrowest terraces and most 
stony soils are grown with vines: grapes, apples, 
and pot-herbs are the principal produce of the 
gardens. For these and a few ordinary commo- 
dities and manufactures from loannina, they have 
a market on Thursdays and Saturdays, which is 
attended from some of the nearest villages. The 
surrounding mountains furnish an excellent pas- 
ture for sheep in summer, and large flocks are 
here tended by Vlakhiote shepherds during that 
season. 

Such is the steepness of the hill of Kalarytes, 


VI. | EPIRUS. 279 


that the topmost houses are at least 500 feet higher 
than the lowest, and the vertical streets of the 
town are mere zigzag paths formed into steps. 
On the southern side, by which we approached the 
town, the position terminates in a tremendous pre- 
cipice, the summit of which is so near to the 
church of St. George, on the opposite ridge, that 
words may be heard from the one place to the 
other ; and the first intelligence is constantly com- 
municated in this manner, on the arrival of pas- 
sengers or caravans from loannina, which in winter 
are sometimes arrested there by asudden fall of snow 
for several days. It is curious to remark with how 
much ease this τηλολαλία or distant conversation 15 
carried on. It is an art which, as well as that of 
τηλοσκοπία, or of distinguishing distant objects, is 
possessed by the Albanians and mountaineers of 
Greece in a degree which seems wonderful to 
those who have never been required to exercise 
their ears, eyes, and voices to the same extent. 
The same qualities were among the accomplish- 
ments of the heroic ages of Greece, the manners 
and peculiarities of which have never been extinct 
in the mountainous and more independent districts 
of this country. 

The houses of Kalarytes are all on a small plan, 
but generally neat, well arranged, and well fur- 
nished, according to Greek ideas of convenience. 
The hanging gardens which separate them are 
watered by streams from numerous fountains, 
supplying every part of the town with a cold and 
pure water, of which the Kalarytiotes are justly 


280 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


proud. The roofs of the houses are covered like 
those of Greek mountain-villages in general, with 
πλάκαις, or large slabs of a limestone, which readily 
splits into this form. These are squared more or 
less accurately according to the opulence of the 
owner, and in addition to other fastenings, gene- 
rally require large masses of stone to be laid upon 
them, in order to obtain increased resistance to 
the furious winds which prevail in this elevated 
situation, and which in the winter often unroof the 
houses in spite of all precautions. Every dwelling 
of the better kind has a χειμονικὸν, or winter apart- 
ment, in the lower story ; above which is the prin- 
cipal chamber of reception, generally fitted with 
windows of coarse Venetian glass, but otherwise 
constructed and fitted up in that Turkish style 
which is so little adapted to the climate of these 
mountains. 

The language of the Vlakhiote towns of Pindus 
differs very slightly from that of Wallachia, and 
contains consequently many Latin words, derived 
from the Roman colonists of Dacia. At Kalarytes 
all the men speak Greek, and many of the women ; 
but the Wlakh is the common language both in 
the towns and among the shepherds. The Latin 
words are not so numerous as in Italian or Spanish, 
but the flexions and the auxiliary verbs, in some 
of their forms, are less changed than in any of the 
daughters of the Latin. The Greeks give the 
following expression as an example of the vocalty. 
of the Wlakh, a characteristic in which the Greek 
itself is not deficient : 


vI. | EPIRUS. 281 


7 vA 7 home| 
oao, aue, Ol, aua , 


αὐγὰ, σταφύλια, πρόβατα, ἐδῶ. 
With the aid of these words, a party of Albanian 
or Greek palikaria may order their dinners on 
arriving at a Vlakhiote village. 

On the north-eastern side of Kalarytes, a long 
declivity, which contains the greater part of the 
cultivable land belonging to the town, falls to 
a torrent, the middle one of the three tributaries 
already described, as forming one of the branches 
of the Arta. On the lowest part of the slope, on 
the bank of the river, stood the Hellenic town 
which possessed this secluded district. The ruins 
are in no part extant to any great height, though 
almost the entire circuit is traceable, consisting of 
a loose ill-constructed kind of masonry, of the 
third kind, but containing a few large masses of 
stone. The site is covered with vineyards in ter- 
races, at the back of which some high rocks were 
the upper limit of the town; from the opposite 
bank of the torrent rises abruptly a rocky height, 
on the other side of which is Matzaki. A little 
below the ruins are some mills; the view from the 
ancient site is extremely confined on every side, 
except down the river, where the opening shows 
woody slopes folding over one another, with the 
mountains near Arta in the distance. The place 
is called Viliza, or Vigliza, a modification of the 
Romaic vigla, and like the Latin vigilo, from which 


' The separate sound of each _ [talian, attending to the ac- 
vowel is to be given, as in cent. 


282 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


it is immediately derived, may be traced to the 
same root.as the Hellenic synonym Phyle. 

The former state of the district of Kalarytes is 
preserved in the following proverb: κάστρον Βηλιζὰ, 
χωρίον Ματζύκι, ᾿Ακαλαρρύταις payada, καὶ Συράκω 
πεντεσπήτια, Meaning that formerly Viliza was the 
fortress, Matzaki the town, Akalarrytes an out- 
lying quarter of the town, and Syrako a little 
detached hamlet. But such is the change, that 
there are now 500 houses in each of the two last 
places, and in Matzuki only 25. Some years ago 
(it was before Aly Pasha gained Ioannina) there 
were 40 Turkish families at Kalarytes, but such 
was the influence of the Christians at that time 
with the Validé, that the Turks were removed to 
Vendista, on the opposite side of the Aspro. 

It may be remarked in every part of Greece, 
that whenever circumstances, which are often oc- 
curring, though they are seldom very permanent, 
favour the industry and security of the Greeks in 
any particular place, and enable them to acquire 
some degree of comfort and opulence, they are 
never slow in tempting their tyrants to plunder 
them, by their imprudence and vanity, or by their 
envious and contentious disposition. The Vlakhi- 
otes, who with less native acuteness than the 
Greeks, are endowed with more steadiness, pru- 
dence, and perseverance, are nevertheless like all 
republicans, (for such they may be styled, as well 
as the Greeks of the Eleftherokhoria, notwithstand- 
ing the despotism of the supreme government) 
seldom free from intestine intrigues and divisions. 

12 


“ἃ, «ὦ 


VI. | EPiRUS. 283 


The Pasha takes care to be well informed of the 
local politics, and allows no good opportunity to 
escape of turning these, or any other accidental 
circumstances to his own purposes. Not long 
since, on discovering that G. T., one of the lead- 
ing citizens, had lent a large sum to the town and 
was in great want of a repayment, which the town 
could not conveniently make ; the Pasha offered 
T. his interference, on condition of his having a 
large share. Not many years ago, the Kalary- 
tiotes were moved with the desire of having bells 
to some of their churches, one of the attributes of 
the temples of the Oriental Christians, of which, 
because forbidden by the Turks, they are par- 
ticularly proud. Aly, though generally very in- 
dulgent on the subject of building and repairing 
churches, did not omit.so good an opportunity of 
making the Kalarytiotes pay for their vanity, and 
exacted 15,000 piastres from them for the per- 
mission to have bells. 

Aug. 12.—At 4.30 this afternoon, I set out, 
in company with Messrs. John and David Morier, 
with the intention of climbing to the summit of 
the peak of Mount Pindus, called Kakardhitza, or 
Kakardhista', which bears S.E. from Kalarytes, 
and has the appearance of being the highest point 


1 These two terminations are nerally has. The latter ter- 


generally convertible: the first 
was unknown in Hellenic, and 
has been adopted by the mo- 
dern Greeks, from the Sclavonic 
tsh, which pronunciation it ge- 


mination was common in the 
northern parts of Greece, in 
gentile adjectives, as, Oreste, 
Lyncesteze. 


284 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


in the whole range. Descending into the ravine 
of the torrent of Vilizaé, we cross it at some mills 
a little below the Palea Khora, or ruins before 
described. One of these mills is for corn, and 
another for fulling the skuti, or cloth for making 
the cloaks called Kazac, the chief manufacture 
of the Vlakhiotes. The torrent, bridge, and build- 
ings, overhung by precipices, form a beautiful 
piece of mountain scenery. We cross the ridge 
which hes between the river of Viliza and Mat- 
zuki by a tedious zigzag ascent and descent, and 
arrive, in 1.45 from Kalarytes, at Matzuki, which 
is situated in a hollow immediately at the foot of 
Kakardhista, where a torrent collected from the 
great summits around, rattles along the ravine, 
and proceeds to join the streams from Viliza, 
Kalarytes, and Syrako. At the back of the vil- 
lage, towards the north-east, rises the steep ridge 
which connects Kakardhista with the summits 
towards Métzovo, called Peristéri and Tzikuréla : 
like all the others, it is a white bare mass of lime- 
stone. The houses of Matziki belong chiefly to 
persons, who keep shops for the sale of capots and 
a few of the other productions of Greece, in the 
islands of the Adriatic and Ionian seas, or in the 
maritime towns of Italy. The two most opulent of 
their traders are settled at Corfa. Very few of 
the men are now in the village. Those who re- 
side are employed in the manufacture of capots, 
or as carriers with their mules, or in cultivating a 
few χωράφια, or fields of corn and maize, on the 
mountain side, or in the care of sheep and goats. 
The person of whom I have hired a mule for the 


VI. | EPIRUS. 285 


expedition, who brought it to Kalarftes, and ac- 
companied me on foot, kept a shop for capots, 
and other commodities, during seven years at Ca- 
diz, and for another three years at Leghorn. He 
was at Rome when the French entered it the first 
time. Most of these people, as may be supposed, 
speak Italian. They ascribe the ruin of their town 
to the quartering of Albanian soldiers; the place 
being more accessible to this pestilence, than Ka- 
larytes and Syrako. The annual contributions of 
the village amount to 9000 piastres, of which 6000 
are paid to Aly Pasha, 500 to the Turkish Subashi 
for staying away, and the rest for the interest of 
money borrowed by the village, and other local 
charges. The burthen to each house increases with 
the diminution of the population: so that one of 
the proprietors of our mules has paid this year, as 
the head of a family, 110 Spanish dollars, or more 
than twice as much as some of the larger house- 
holders at Kalarytes, and has been obliged to 
borrow the money at loannina, at twenty per 
cent. interest. Beldani, who was made tutor to 
the Emperor Alexander, and his brother Constan- 
tine, by the Empress Catharine, was a native of 
Matzuki. He was a poor merchant at Leghorn 
when Alexis Orloff took him into his service, and 
carried him to St. Petersburg. Our hosts of the 
poor cottage in which we lodge, priding them- 
selves on being μεσοφράγκοι, or half Franks in 
their manners, endeavour to prove it by giving 
us a covered table at supper, with plates, knives 
and forks. At 2 in the morning we set out to scale 
the mountain. 


286 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


August 13.—The ascent being very rugged, 
our progress is slow ; the route crosses many small 
torrents, which flow to the right into a ravine, 
lying between this mountain and the pine-covered 
peak conspicuous from Kalarytes, which connects 
at its southern extremity Kakardhista with Tzu- 
mérka. At 4.30 the road being no longer practi- 
cable for mules, we mount on foot, during another 
hour, by a very steep ascent, where loose stones 
and earth, or grass dripping with dew, carry the 
feet half way back at every step. Towards the 
summit are some deep patches of snow, and a hoar 
frost on the grass. Αἱ ἃ few minutes after sunrise 
we reach the highest point. 

To the east the view is rendered indistinct by 
the sun being in that direction, and by an atmo- 
sphere not perfectly clear. There is a haze like- 
wise over the sea on the opposite side; but this is 
the ordinary state of the atmosphere of Greece in 
the middle of summer, and a clear day in winter 
is much more favourable for obtaining a sight of 
distant objects. Nevertheless we distinguish Corfa, 
Cefalonia, and Mount Voidhia in the Moréa. To 
the north, Mount Tomor, and the summits be- 
tween it and Bitolia, are seen, particularly a peak 
between Kastoria and Fildrina, to the right of 
which are those more eastward, towards Vodhena 
and Vérria. The horizontal arch between N.E. 
and S. is bounded by Olympus, Ossa, Pelon, 
Othrys, and the mountains of tolia, of which 
latter the peaks called Velakhi and Viéna are the 
most conspicuous. The remotest point which I 
can recognize is Voidhia, or Panachaicum, in the 


VI. | EPIRUS. 287 


Moréa; the direct distance of which is about 100 
geographical miles. The ridges along the wes- 
‘tern coast from Xerdmero to Khimara, are na- 
turally much more distinct. To the north-west 
the geography of the valleys of the Upper Aous, 
in which Arghyrdkastro, Tepeléni, Premedi and 
Konitza are situated, is well defined, though none 
of those places are distinguishable. Immediately 
below us, to the east, are the mountains of Aspro- 
potamo, a confused mass, resembling the waves of 
a stormy sea; and to the right, those of ‘Agrafa, 
of the same description: the highest summit of 
the former is nearly in a line with Pelium. Olym- 
pus has the appearance of being the highest point 
in sight. Of those in the Pindian ridge, none 
seems to rival Kakardhista, unless it be a summit 
near Samarina. Its height above the sea is pro- 
bably about 7000 feet. 

A great part of the course of the Aspro or Achelous 
is traceable from Kakardhista, though the river 
cannot be distinguished in consequence of the depth 
of the valleys in which it is encased, or the hazi- 
ness of the atmosphere hanging over them. Its 
reputed sources are at Khaliki, a Vlakhiote village 
of 200 houses, situated midway between Kala- 
rytes and Meétzovo, on the south-eastern side of 
Mount Tzikuréla, but not in sight from hence. 
As the name Khaliki, which is not uncommon in 
Greece, is generally a corruption of the Hellenic 
Χαλκὶς, indicating the former existence of a Chalcis 
in the same place, it serves, in the present instance, 
to illustrate an hitherto unexplained passage of 


288 EPIRUS. [CHAP. . 


Dionysius the geographer, in which he evidently 
intended to remark that the Achelous rose at 
Chalcis'. After receiving several streams from 
the mountains around Khaliki, the river follows 
the narrow ravines included between the summits 
in the district of Aspropdtamo, and those of Kakar- 
hista, Tzumérka, and Radhovisi. On the slope of 
one of the mountains in the last-mentioned sub- 
district of Arta, are seen the lands of Vrestenitza 
above the right bank of the river, near the bridge 
of Koraki, which is in the road from Arta to Trik- 
kala, through ‘Agrafa. From thence the Aspro flows 
for about 20 miles through a country, in which the 
great summits are more distant on either side, after 
which it again skirts the foot of a lofty rock of 
the Tzumérka chain, which is named Kalana, and 
is a conspicuous object from Prévyza. Here the 
river is again crossed by a bridge, called that of 
Tetarna, from a monastery on the left, and a few 
miles lower is joined by its principal tributary. 
The united stream then passes between perpen- 
dicular rocks into a country of woody heights, of 
secondary elevation, until it emerges near the ruins 
of Stratus into the great Aivtohan plain. In almost 
every direction the mountains hide the valleys ; 
Kakardhista being in the centre of the most moun- 
tainous part of Greece. The only plain in sight is 
that of loannina, with a small portion of that of Trik- 
kala: Ioannina is the onlytown. The immense preci- 


ἂν Asc ν . « ὅσσας τ᾽ ἀπὸ Χαλκίδος ἕρπων 


Δίνῃς ἀργυρέῃς ᾿Αχελώϊος ἀμφὶς ἑλίσσει. 
Dionys. Perieg. v. 496, 


why EPIRUS. 289 


pices of Tzumérka appear considerably below us: 
they hide Arta and all the Gulf, except a small 
part of its eastern extremity near Makrinoro, which 
makes its appearance between Tzumérka and Sa- 
karétzi, as the mountain of Radhovisi is named. 

Kakardhista is quite bare of trees or shrubs, but 
furnishes a fine short herbage to the very summit. 
A sharp rocky ridge, which connects it with the 
peak of Peristéri, separates the course of the 
waters flowing respectively to the Arta and to the 
Aspro, and divides the district of Malakassi in the 
kaza of Ioannina from that of Aspropdétamo in 
Trikkala. The latter sub-district extends fifty 
miles down the river from its sources, compre- 
hending the sides of the adjacent mountain on 
either side, and separating first Ioannina and then 
Arta from ‘Agrafa. The right of pasturage is so 
accurately defined between Joannina and Aspro- 
potamo, that the flocks of one district are not 
allowed to enter the other. Kakardhista itself 
falls steeply into a deep ravine which lies between 
it and another lower but abrupt and rocky crest, 
which slopes to the Aspro. 

We descend to a mandra, or sheep-fold, sup- 
ported on each side by one of the palikaria, who 
have accompanied us from Kalarytes; and who, 
though with daggers and pistols at their girdles, 
and a musket slung over their shoulders, never 
make a false step, though bearing the any of 
another person. Some goat’s milk, with bread 
which we brought with us, furnishes our breakfast. 
The annual profit of a yew in these mountains is 
reckoned as follows: two piastres for the cheese 

VOL. I. U 


290 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


and milk, four piastres for the lamb, and half a 
piastre for the wool; out of which there is a clear 
gain of five piastres. From the mandra we reach 
Matziki in two hours, leave it at 5 p.m., and in 
two hours and a half return to Kalarytes. So 
steep is the northern side of the hill of Matzaki, 
that it takes longer to descend than it had required 
yesterday to mount it. 

The shepherds of these mountains, as well as 
those who tend their flocks around Ioannina, play 
on a pipe (in Greek φλογέρα, in Albanian fuol), 
which resembles that described by Theocritus, in- 
asmuch as it has nine holes on the side, and is 
partly closed at either end with wax’. But some 
of the modern pipes of Epirus have a singularity 
which has not been noticed by any author, being 
made of the thigh of the vulture ’, or of the eagle ὅ, 
which are bones of extreme hardness, and of a 
size well adapted to a shepherd’s pipe. These 
materials may be more common now than an- 
ciently, because gunpowder has given the moderns 
the power of bringing down such birds more easily 
than could formerly have been done by means of 
arrows. In the mountain pastures in every part 
of Greece, the shepherds may be heard, as the same 
poet has described, pouring forth a wild melodious 
strain from their pipes, amidst the murmuring of the 
waters, and the whispering of the wind through the 

; σύριγγ᾽ ἔχω ἐννεάφωνον 
Λευκὸν καρὸν ἔχοισαν ἴσον κάτω, ἴσον ἄνωθεν. 


Theocr. Id, 8, v. 18, 21. 


ὁ ὄρνεα, 3 deroe. 


Was by: EPIRUS. 291 


trees. Theocritus has particularly referred to the 
pine as producing this sound'. And the pine is 
doubtless the most psithyristic of trees. It is sur- 
prising that he has not noticed also the aromatic 
odour which emanates from it in summer. 

Aug. 31.—Leaving loannina this forenoon for 
Grevena, I follow the causeway between the lake 
and the foot of the hill of Kastritza, and having 
crossed the plain of Barkumadhi, arrive in two 
hours at the khan of Ardhomista, near the foot of 
Mount Dhrysko. The plain is covered with maize 
and melons, of both which the harvest is near at 
hand. After resting an hour and a half, we quit 
the khan, ascend in three quarters of an hour the 
ridge of Dhrysko, and in another quarter arrive at 
the khan of that name on the eastern face of 
the mountain, which is a continuation of Mount 
Mitzikéli, and derived, undoubtedly, its name’ 
from the oaks still growing here, and which an- 
ciently may have been larger and more numerous 
than they are now. The khan seems to have been 
placed here for the sake of a copious source of 
water, which the tatar, who accompanies me, and 
who has had long experience, declares to be the 
best between Ioannina and Constantinople. One 
of his corps brought letters a few days ago from 


1 “Adv τι τὸ ψιθύρισμα, Kal & πίτυς, αἰπόλε, τήνα, 
“A ποτὶ ταῖς παγαῖσι μελίσδεται, ἁδὺ δὲ καὶ τὺ 
Συρίσδες. 
Theocr. Id. 1. ν. 1. 


* Δρύσκος, a place of oaks, or by abbreviation perhaps from 
δρύσκιος shaded with oaks. 


u 2 


292 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


Constantinople in four days and a half: thus per- 
forming two hundred computed hours, or six hun- 
dred miles of road distance, in one hundred and 
eight hours, including stoppages. To be ap- 
pointed to such a journey as mine, is to be well 
paid for a comparative state of repose, and is con- 
sidered, therefore, as a favour conferred upon the 
tatar by the Pasha. 

After a twenty minutes’ halt we continue our 
descent, and in another twenty minutes arrive at 
the junction of the two great branches of the Arta : 
one flowing from Zagori, the other from Métzovo. 
The place and neighbouring valley are hence 
named Dhipdtamo. A bridge of three arches, 
called the Lady’s Bridge’, crosses the Zagori 
branch, which is the larger of the two, and is com- 
posed of a great number of streams collected in 
the hollow between Mount Mitzikeli and the paral- 
lel higher range, or central ridge of Pindus. On 
the side of the mountain of Syrako, above Dhip6- 
tamo, stands the village of Gotzista, divided into 
two makhalas, and surrounded with cultivated 
slopes. A point above it, which is separated by a 
ravine from the great mountain, is the site of a 
Hellenic fortress or fortified come, the walls of which 
inclose the summit and face of the hill. 

In winter the road, after crossing the bridge, 
follows the right bank of the river of Métzovo. 
Instead of crossing the bridge, we ford the 
united stream, and then ride along the bed 
of the Métzovo branch, which, though con- 


* τὸ γεφύρι τῆς κυρᾶς. 


vi. | EPIRUS. 293 


sisting entirely of loose stones, is a saving in 
time, the line being shorter than along the ἄκραις, 
or rugged banks. Occasionally, however, we 
cross some of the akres. Like all the roots of 
the mountains bordering these valleys, they are 
covered with small oak, ilex, pirnari, and a va- 
riety of shrubs, among which the lentisk is the 
most common. At 6 we arrive at a half-built kula 
of the Pasha, on the right bank of the river, where 
are a few fields of kalambokki. In winter, the road 
reaches this point from the bridge of the Lady, by 
crossing and recrossing two other intermediate 
bridges. On the heights to the left stands Khry- 
sovitza, beautifully situated among the woods, and 
noted for its monastery of the Panaghia, whose 
festival on the 23d of August is resorted to by all 
the neighbourhood, particularly from Ioannina. 
At 6.35 we halt for the night at the Three Khans', 
situated on a height overlooking the right bank of 
the river, in a part of the valley where its direc- 
tion and that of the river change from about 
E.S.E. to E. by N. The three khans may pos- 
sibly be the successors of three Roman taverns ; 
for Tres Taberne is a name repeatedly occurring 
in the Roman itineraries; and although this 
road is not found in any of them, the general 
structure of the country is a sufficient proof that 
the pass of Métzovo was in all ages one of the 
chief thoroughfares of Northern Greece. The 
summit named Tzikuréla, or Tzukuréla, was im- 
mediately above us on the right, about half way 


* ra Τρία Xana. 


294 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


up the valley. To the north-eastward 15 the other 
peak, called Peristéri; beyond which is the sum- 
mit above Khaliki, of the same height nearly as 
that of Syrako, and situated midway between 
Peristéri and the southern end of the Zygés of 
Métzovo. The hills around the Three Khans 
are covered with vineyards and wood. At less 
than a mile beyond them, at the head of a slope 
of vineyards reaching to the river, is the village 
of Vutinés, and on a height on one side of the 
vineyards some remains of ancient walls called 
Lakhandékastro. The masons of Métzovo resort to 
it for the sake of the tiles which they find there. 
It was perhaps a Roman military station, for the 
defence of the pass, which is here more open than 
in any other part. 

Sept. 1.—Our route continues along the river’s 
bed, crosses it several times, and at intervals 
passes over its woody and rocky banks by an exe- 
crable road. The village of Grevendista is situated 
among some cultivated slopes on the side of the 
mountain to the right. In seventy minutes we 
cross to the right bank by a bridge, a little above 
which is the junction of two branches of the river, 
one coming from Métzovo, the other from a valley 
to the right, in the direction of the mountain of 
Khaliki, which thus gives rise both to the Arach- 
thus and Achelous. We ascend along the side of 
the mountain which overhangs the right bank of 
the Métzovo branch of the river, and at 8 a.M., in 
two hours from the khans, arrive at the northern 
and larger of the two makhalas, into which Mét- 
zovo is divided by the ravine. The northern is 


wip EPIRUS. 295 


called Prosilio', as being exposed to the sun, 
while the southern being shaded by the mountain 
on which it stands, is named Anilio”. The road 
to Trikkala passes through the latter, and then 
ascends the Zygés*, or ridge, as a long woody 
mountain is named which has a north and south 
_ direction, and which separates the sources of the 
Arachthus from those of the Peneius, connecting 
Kakardhista and the ridge of Syrako with the 
- Zagori summits and those near Kénitza and Sama- 
rina. The streams descending from the western 
slope of the Zygés, are the principal feeders of the 
torrent which separates the two makhaladhes, of 
Métzovo, and which we followed from the bridge. 
There are about seven hundred houses in the two 
divisions of the town, which, together with Mala- 
kassi, a village on the eastern side of the Ζυρόβ, 
and two others is an appanage of the Validé Sul- 
tan. Formerly, in consideration of the expenses 
to which the Metzovites were subject from the 
passage of soldiers and travellers, they were liable 
only to the Kharadj, and to the payment of five 
thousand piastres a year to the Validé’s agent, for 
which advantage they were bound to ensure the 
safety of the Pass, and to maintain a body of 
armatoli under a captain. The Vezir, by paying 
a larger sum to the Validé than she before re- 
ceived, has obtained the Mukata, and exacts from 
the Metzovites fifty-five purses, besides obliging 
them to maintain an Albanian guard, nominated 


" πρὸς ἥλιον. ° ὃ Ζυγός. 
2 ἀνήλιον. 


296 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


by himself. The adjoining slopes produce wheat, 
barley, and rye; but the wheat is not more than 
enough for the consumption of a month or two, 
and the barley still more insufficient, on account 
of the demand of passengers for their cattle. They 
have some large flocks of sheep and goats; but the 
ereater part of the men, as in the other mountain 
villages on the borders of Epirus and Thessaly, 
seek their fortunes as labourers, artizans, and shop- 
keepers, in other parts of Turkey, or as merchants 
in Germany, Hungary, Russia, or the Mediterra- 
nean. Those who are not too distant, visit their 
families for a short time in the summer. The 
climate, in winter, is described as more severe 
even than that of Kalarytes. 

At 2.25 we quit Prosilio, and mounting the hill 
for half an hour, arrive in a plain called Politzia, 
inclosed between the heights of Métzovo and 
Mavro-vini, which is a long mountain covered 
with pines, lying in a north and south direction, 
and forming a northerly continuation of the Zygos. 
On its slope near the plain is a place called by the 
Vlakhi Beratori, a name supposed to be a corrup- 
tion of Imperatoria. Wrought stones, coins, and 
similar remains of antiquity, are found there, as 
well as appearances indicative of some process of 
metallurgy having been carried on in the place. 
These vestiges, combined with the name, seem to 
show that a Roman settlement existed here earlier 
than that of the Dacian or Vlakhiote colonists, whose 
descendants now occupy these mountains. On 
the opposite side of the plain to Beratori stands 
a beech-tree, called in the Vlakhiote tongue Fago 


vi. | EPIRUS. 297 


scripto, from some appearance of inscriptions on 
it. The plain produces in summer some rye, and 
a great abundance of excellent grass, all which is 
consumed by the cattle of Métzovo or those of pas- 
sengers. During the remainder of the year the 
plain is either covered with snow or is in a state 
of marsh. There are no sheep or cattle upon it, 
though it is now dry ; the soil apparently is good. 
The small streams which water it flow to the 
north, through the district of Zagoéri, towards 
Konitza, and are therefore the extreme tributaries 
of the Aous. 

_ Having traversed the plain for an hour, we 
ascend a ridge connected with the northern end 
of Mavro-vini, and covered towards the summit 
with pines', and at 4.30 arrive at the guard of the 
Tjankurtara dervéni, after having passed a large 
khan of that name a little below the summit of the 
pass. At the dervéni there is nothing but a tem- 
porary shed. Here the mountains Mitzikéli and 
Olytzika are seen in one direction, and in the other 
Mount Burino, with the mountain of Siatista to the 
left of it,and nearer the lower hills about Grevena. 
After a halt of fifteen minutes we descend from 
the dervéni through a dense forest of large pines, 
remarkable for the straightness of their stems. On 
the ascent where the trees are not so close, some 
of them are fifteen feet in circumference, and sixty 
or eighty feet high: several of them have been 
struck with lightning, and are burnt at the top. 


1 


mevkot. This word is applied by the Greeks to the pinus 
sylvestris as well as the maritima. 


298 _ EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


There is reason to believe from Livy, following 
Polybius, that this part of Mount Pindus bore the 
appellation of Citium, probably from a town of 
that name which stood in some part of the pass 
leading from Grevena to loannina. Mount Citium 
is mentioned by the historian in his relation of the 
expedition of Perseus, when he led an army of 
ten thousand infantry and three hundred horse to 
Stratus, in the winter of the year 170—169 B. C. 
On the third day from Elimeia, he reached Mount 
Citium, where he was much impeded by the deep 
snow, and with difficulty found sufficient space for 
encamping. The fourth day, in which his beasts 
of burthen particularly suffered, terminated at a 
temple of Jupiter Niczus; and the fifth, which 
was a very long march, at the Arachthus, where 
he was detained by the swollen state of the river 
until he had constructed a bridge. At the end of 
one day’s march from thence he was met by Archi- 
damus, the strategus of the Aitolians, halted on the 
borders of Aitolia, and on the following day en- 
camped on the Achelous, near Stratus'. Perseus 
appears to have marched through Epirus because 
the Molossi? had invited him, and because the 
Athamanes, who were on the more direct route, 
were in alliance with the Romans. As it is evident 


1 Liv. 1. 48, c. 21. were at that moment auxiliaries 

ἡ “Vocantibus Epirotis,” is οἵ Appius Claudius before Pha- 
all that Livy says; but Mo- note; and the Molossi resisted 
lossis was the only part of Epi- the Romans to the last: these 
rus which it was necessary for therefore were clearly the Epi- 
Perseus to enter; the Thesproti _rotes intended by Livy. 


VI. | EPIRUS. 299 


that he descended upon the right bank of the 
Arachthus, since otherwise there would have been 
no necessity for crossing it; and as he made only 
two marches from his bridge to Stratus, there can 
be little doubt that he crossed the river not far 
above Arta, and that his route from Mount Citium 
was either through Zago6ri into the plain of [oan- 
nina, or through the same district in a more south- 
ern direction to Mount Dhrysko, the site perhaps of 
Niceum, and from thence by the Tomarokhoria. 
In either case it follows, from the geographical 
construction of the country, that during the long 
march terminating on the right bank of the Arach- 
thus, he pursued the course of that river, and 
during all that day perhaps was seeking for a 
passage. He then, probably, passed through the 
modern Rhadhovisi to the Achelous, or by the 
valley of Komboti into that of the Petitarus, but 
avoiding Ambracia, which was in the hands of the 
Romans. 

After following for half an hour a small river, 
we arrive, at 5.40, at Milia, a Vlakhiote village of 
forty families, situated in the midst of the forest, 
on the bank of the stream. A few corn and maize- 
fields dispersed on the hills around, and several 
mills on the river side, are all the property of the 
village, except the cattle, which they employ as 
carriers. We halt ten minutes, and then follow a 
good horse-path along the banks of the same 
stream, in a ravine bordered by a continued forest 
of pines; and at 7.20 quit the river, which here 
turns to the left of our route in a northerly direc- 
tion along the foot of a ridge, which is thickly 

12 


300 EPIRUS. | CHAP. 


covered with pines, mixed occasionally with beeches 
and a few horsechestnuts. The numerous small 
caravans which we meet, show that this is one of 
the great lines of traffic between Epirus and Mace- 
dona. At 7.30 we arrive at Krania, a Vlakhiote 
village of fifty neat cottages, pleasantly situated 
in an opening of the forest, amidst fields of maize 
and other corn, fenced with a well-made palisad- 
ing. The scene has an appearance of comfort and 
successful industry seldom seen in Greek or Turkish 
villages : but, unhappily for these poor Vlakhiotes, 
their village has lately become one of Aly Pasha’s 
tjiftliks. The corn, after deducting the Vezir's 
portion, suffices only for a small part of the con- 
sumption of the inhabitants, whose means of sub- 
sistence are chiefly derived from the cheese of their 
sheep and goats ; from the wood which they cut in 
the forest and transport to Ioannina and other 
towns ; and from the profit of their horses and 
mules, which are let to traders and travellers. 
The master of the house in which 1 lodge, who 
possesses two horses and two oxen, formerly kept 
a shop at Smyrna, Constantinople, and Salonika ; 
and now employs himself in transporting wood to 
Ioannina, Grevena, Larissa, and Trikkala, by 
which he is just able to pay the twenty per cent. 
interest on the money he has been obliged to 
borrow. 

Sept. 2.—This morning we arrive in half an 
hour at the summit of a ridge facing Krania to the 
eastward, just as the sun is rising behind the broad 
Olympus, as Homer so properly describes that 
mountain. The range which unites it with Pindus, 


VI. | EPIRUS. 301 


and at the foot of which are the towns of Siatista 
and Kastoria, is seen stretching from Olympus to 
the north-westward. Our road is well beaten, and 
winds agreeably through a forest of pines and oaks, 
gradually descending until at the end of one hour 
and fifty minutes from Krania we pass, at 7.30, 
through Kieperd, one of the small Vlakhiote vil- 
lages, of which we have seen several on either side 
of our road. At Kieperd men and women are em- 
ployed in threshing rye', by driving a sledge with 
one man standing upon it, round the threshing-floor. 
The huts of the Vlakhiotes are well built, and 
neatly plastered with earth: and to the traveller 
afford better shelter than the cottages of a similar 
class among the Greeks and Albanians, the inner 
apartment being well protected against cold and 
rain in winter, and most of the cottages having a 
gallery in front, closed at either end ; which is not 
too cool for a lodging in the fine season, when the 
inner part of every house, not excepting those of 
the Vlakhi, swarms with vermin. 

From Kieperé, having descended rapidly the 
roots of the mountain where fields of corn and 
vines, fenced with pallisades, are intermixed with 
woods consisting of oaks of various kinds, and 
where the soil, like this side of Mount Pindus in 
general, seems capable of a productive cultivation, 
we arrive at 8.40 at the junction of two rivers. 
The larger is that which we followed down the 
vale of Milia, and left at Krania, taking there a 
turn to the left of our route; the other proceeds 


1 σεκαλη. 


302 EPIRUS. (CHAP. 


from the woody sides of Pindus on our right to the 
southward. A little below the junction a bridge 
crosses the united stream, which then flows east- 
ward over a rocky bed of limestone, composed of 
thin flakes lying vertical to the horizon, along a 
valley closely bounded by undulated downs, like 
those which border the Orontes near Hama, but 
with banks not so high. Though now shallow, the 
river is wide, and in winter impetuous. It is called 
Venetik6. We follow the right bank for a short 
distance under a woody hill, then pass below a 
height of bare rock washed by the river, and after- 
wards along a narrow vale which is grown with 
stunted oaks and wild pears, and is bounded by 
woody hills, or irregular downs of fine corn land, 
a description of country which continues to a con- 
siderable distance below Grevend. At 9 we halt 
at the Khan of Venetik6, which has lately been 
built at the expense of a Tutunji, or smoke-master, 
of the Vezir, and stands on the river-side at a 
fountain of excellent water, issuing out of the side 
of the hill. The charge for eggs, butter, melons, 
water-melons, bread, salt, red pepper, and brandy, 
is about sixpence a head, which I have some diffi- 
culty in persuading my tatar is not unreasonable. 

Departing at 10.15, we cross the river, and 
having followed its left bank for a quarter of an 
hour, traverse some downs to a much smaller 
stream, which, having also crossed, we imme- 
diately ascend, at 11.30, to the Metropolis of the 
bishopric of Grevena', where stand the cathedral 


' ἡ μητρόπολις τῶν Τρεβενῶν. 


- 


vt. | EPIRUS. 303 


church and palace of the bishop, surrounded by 
twenty Greek houses. The bishop I left at loannina. 
The Turkish Makhala of Grevend is a mile dis- 
tant to the north-eastward, and though it contains 
only eighty families, is the chief place of Grevena 
which in the plural number comprehends a great 
number of small Turkish villages and _ tyiftliks. 
The country resembles Northern Europe more 
than Epirus or the other parts of Greece, consist- 
ing of an undulated surface, well supplied with 
sources of water, intersected by numerous streams, 
and diversified with beautiful groves of oak and 
other timber trees. Nor is the soil inferior to the 
aspect, but would produce corn in great abund- 
ance, if population and security were here in any 
moderate proportion to natural advantages. The 
many πράγματα φορτώμενα, or loaded horses and 
mules, which we have met on the road from 
Métzovo, and the far greater part of which were 
charged with flour, show that even now it supplies 
Epirus and the islands with bread. 

The Venetiko and river of Grevend join the 
Vistritza, separately, to the eastward near the 
foot of Mount Burino; after which the united river 
winds round the southern extremity of that moun- 
tain to Sérvia, and having passed that town, flows 
northward through narrow valleys and deep chasms 
in the great Olympian range, until it emerges near 
Berrhea, which town still preserves its ancient 
name. There can be no doubt that this great 
river, which the Turks call Injé-kara-su, is the 
ancient Haliacmon. 

The largest villages in the district of Grevena 


304 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


are Avdhéla and Perivolio, inhabited by Vlakhiotes, 
and each consisting of about 300 houses. They 
stand near each other on the eastern side of the 
great ridge to the W.S.W. of Grevend, whence 
proceeds one of the branches of the Venétiko, 
which is joined before it enters the plains by those 
from Spilid and Krania. The Turks of Grevena 
occupy, as usual, the lower and richer lands. The 
largest of their villages are Tjurkli and Kryftissa, 
not far from the river which separates the district 
of Grevena from that of Anaselitza. To the south- 
ward, towards Stagis, Grevena extends six hours 
over unproductive hills, where the villages are 
neither large nor numerous. 

Sept. 4.-—From Grevena to Siatista. At 6.35 we 
descend in a quarter of an hour from the Metro- 
polis to the Musulman quarter, which has a ruin- 
ous and wretched appearance, like all the Turkish 
villages of Greece. After following the left bank 
of the river for a quarter of an hour, we turn to the 
left across an undulated country, intersected by 
narrow valleys, where the cultivated land is mixed 
with woods of oaks. Neither the olive nor the 
mulberry for the silkworm, are grown in this 
country, which produces scarcely any thing but 
grain and cattle, with a little wine; but carts, 
which are not to be met with in the great 
plains of Arta, Ioannina, or Arghyrokastro, are 
used in agriculture; they are drawn by two 
oxen, run upon four solid trucks, and have a 
square space for the load, inclosed within wattled 
sides. 

At 7.45 we pass to the left of the small Turkish 


. wn] MACEDONIA. 305 


village of Kubla, and at 8.30, opposite to another 
similar hamlet called Dovrado, we cross a small 
branch of the Vistritza. From thence the road 
traverses a rich and pleasant country of the same 
description as before, but little cultivated, until 
at 9.30 we arrive at a khan, and a high narrow 
bridge of six arches called Pasha Kitpri, which 
erosses the Vistritza just at the point where, after 
having pursued an easterly course, it turns to the 
south along the foot of Mount Burino. 

At 10.15 we quit the khan, and ford the river a 
quarter of a mile above the bridge, then immediately 
leaving to the right the road to Venja and Sérvia, 
we ascend the slope of the mountain of Siatista, 
having the Turkish village Iankovo a little on the 
left. An opening between the mountain of Siatista 
and Mount Buirino shows the mountain of Vérria, 
the ancient Bermius’. Soon afterwards we enter 
the vineyards of Siatista, and mounting a rocky 
hill, arrive at the principal makhala called ἡ χώρα 
at 11.45. After some delay we are sent to the lower 
quarter, named γιεράνη, from whence I am conducted 
back again to the Khora, to the house of Kyr N., 
one of the archons, and nephew of the bishop of 
Siatista, whose ordinary residence is here, but who 
happens at present to be at Sélitza. His title is 
bishop of Sisanium and Satista’, the vulgar pro- 
nunciation of which is Shatsta. His superior is 
the archbishop of ‘Akhridha. 

The town, which contains about 500 houses, is 


1 Herodot. 1. 8, c. 138. * τοῦ Σισανίου καὶ τῆς Σατίσ- 
Strabo, p. 330. τῆς, OY Σιατίστης. 
Vou, i. xX 


306 MACEDONIA. [CHAP. 


situated upon a narrow level, between the upper 
and lower heights of a high rocky mountain, at the 
foot of which extends a large tract of vineyards. 
From this fruit the Siatistans' make some of the 
best wine in Rumili, and which has an extensive 
sale in Macedonia and Thessaly, but is seldom 
sent into Hpirus, on account of the difficulty of 
transport over the Pindus. The wine is of four 
sorts :—1. The ἡλιουμένον, or sun-dried*, which is 
a mixture of white and red grapes, left for eight 
days in the sun, or for six weeks in a covered 
building, after which the produce is a white sweet 
wine, of strong body and high flavour. 2. A dry, 
white wine. 3. A dry, red wine. 4. The ἀψιθινὸν, 
or wine of Absinthium, which is made also in other 
parts of Greece, and is flavoured with a species of 
Artemisia, laid among the grapes when placed in 
the press. This wine is sweet and high flavoured, 
but not the better for the wormwood. The Sia- 
tistans keep their wines three, four, five years, 
and sometimes more. Each considerable _pro- 
prietor has a wine-press, and there are cellars 
under all the larger houses, exhibiting the agree- 
able spectacle of butts arranged im order, as in 
civilized Europe. The most stony soils are held 
to produce the best wine. The grapes this year 
have not attained their full growth, in consequence 
of the want of rain, and the vintage, it is expected, 
will be small in quantity, though good in quality. 


’ οἱ Σιατιστάγοι. 

"ΤῈ Tuscan Aliatico seems tive instead of the participle. 
tobe thesame word inthe Holic It originated probably in the 
form, and in that of the adjec- Greek colonies of Etruria. 


VI. | MACEDONIA. 307 


I was not a little surprised to observe the proofs of 
drought in the appearance of the vineyards, the 
weather having been very different in Epirus. It 
shows the great atmospheric difference between the 
two sides of Mount Pindus. Besides their wine, the 
Siatistans have to boast of the excellence of their 
mutton, fed on the delicate herbage of their lime- 
stone mountain; and of an abundance of game. 
The hares are even troublesome, being so numer- 
ous, that when the snow lies upon the vineyards, 
as it often does in the winter for many days toge- 
ther, itis a common custom to go in pursuit of them 
- without dogs, and to kill them with sticks, half 
famished as they then are, and unable to run. A 
little earlier in the season they afford good sport, 
and coursing is a common amusement of the Sia- 
tistans. Our mode of killing partridges on the 
wing they are not accustomed to, nor have | seen 
it in any part of Greece. The birds, indeed, which 
are all of the red-legged species, are larger, longer 
in their flight, and wilder than ours ; and it is not 
very easy to shoot them. ‘To catch them in nets 
is the common practice in Greece, but they are 
seldom seen for sale in the markets. They are 
more abundant however in Macedonia and Epirus 
than in Southern Greece. 

Almost every family in Siatista has one member 
of it residing as a merchant in Italy, Hungary, 
Austria, or other parts of Germany, and there are 
few of the elders who have not spent ten or twelve 
years of their lives in one of those countries. Ger- 
man is of course very generally spoken, and Italian 
almost as much. The houses are convenient, 
x2 


308 MACEDONIA. [ CHAP. 


clean, and well furnished, and the people more 
curious in their tables than any 1 have met with 
in Greece. This, as the stipendiary physician 
of the place observes to me, is almost the only 
source of disease, so healthy is the air and situa- 
tion. But they drmk, he remarks, rather too 
much of their own good wine, of which one of his 
patients 1s an example, who is now dying of the 
effects of a fall from his horse, after an indulgence 
of that kind. This physician’s name is Paul Re- 
naud, son of a Frenchman, who was attached to the 
English Consulate at Zante. His brother is now 
French Commissaire in that island, and there was 
a third brother in the English East India service, 
who rose to be agent at Busra. All this, which I 
happened to know, was news to M. Paul, who, 
having written to his brothers some years ago and 
received no answer, had long been ignorant of the 
fate of them both. 

The Siatistans complain bitterly of the oppres- 
sions of Aly Pasha. They say, that not contented 
with robbing those who have, he puts in prison. 
those who have not, and thus succeeds sometimes 
in extracting money from their relatives. 

The ordinary annual payments, regular and 
irregular, amount to five hundred purses, be- 
sides which the bishop makes the Vezir an an- 
nual offermg of 4000 piastres, 2000 each half 
year. Such has been the practice for the last 
twelve years. Like the Kalarytiotes, the Siatistans 
have lately been obliged to supply workmen and 
horses for the castle of Suli. When Aly makes a 
tour round this part of his territory, he never fails 


VI. | MACEDONIA. 309 


to visit this place. The Archons generally meet 
him in the plain, and offer perhaps twenty purses, 
begging him not to come into the town. He re- 
ceives the present with smiles, promises that he 
will not put his friends to inconvenience, after- 
wards comes a little nearer, informs them that no 
provisions are to be had in the plain, and after 
being supplied upon the promise of not entering 
the town, quarters on them, in the course of a day 
or two more, with his whole suite, perhaps for 
several days, nor retires until he has received a 
fresh donation. In these progresses he expects 
something from every village, and will accept the 
smallest offerings from individuals. His sons in 
travelling fail not to follow so good an example. 
As he dares not exercise this kind of oppression in 
Albania, the districts on the eastern side of Pindus 
are the great sufferers; and neither pestilence nor 
famine are more dreaded by the poor natives than 
the arrival of those little scraps of coarse paper 
scrawled with a few Greek characters, and stamped 
with the well-known little seal which makes Hpi- 
rus, Thessaly, and Macedonia tremble. Sometimes 
these papers contain a request, that in consequence 
of a momentary want of money, they will supply 
him with a few purses, and place them to. his ac- 
count, though he has never been known to admit 
of any deduction in consequence of these loans 
from the annual contributions. It is admitted, 
that sometimes the Pasha is supplied with a pretext 
for his extortions by the Greeks themselves, who 
have the folly to refer their quarrels to him. In 
these cases, after extorting something from both 


310 MACEDONIA. [CHAP. 


parties, he commonly ends by sending his decision 
by some faithful servant, with an order that he shall 
receive 500 or 1000 piastres for his trouble in car- 
rying the letter. This is generally some favourite 
Albanian, who, having been for several years em- 
ployed in executing the Vezir’s orders without re- 
ward, is at length recompensed in this manner at 
other people’s expence. Not long ago the riches 
of a certain great cattle-feeder, brother-in-law of 
Kyr N., having excited the Pasha’s avarice, was 
kept in prison until he had paid thirty purses, and 
was then obliged to feed his cattle in certain pas- 
tures of the Vezir’s not far from Siatista, where 
_ His Highness hired thieves to carry off 2000 sheep. 
The usual mode of squeezing a rich man, is to send 
for him to loannina, and put him in prison upon 
some pretended accusation. There are no means 
of avoiding the summons but by flight, which with 
a family is extremely difficult, as the Pasha gene- 
rally takes care to keep a strict watch upon the 
motions of all the relatives of those who are known 
to possess property. Numerous emigrations have, 
nevertheless, taken place, in consequence of the 
late extension of Aly’s power; and many of the 
merchants of Moskhdpoli, Korytza, Kastoria, Sé- 
litza, Kozani, and Sérvia, instead of carrying on 
commerce as formerly with correspondents or rela- 
tives in Germany, or other parts of Europe, have 
withdrawn into those countries, while some have 
migrated to other parts of Turkey. The Osmanlis 
of Thessaly and Macedonia entertain as great a 
dread of Aly as the Greeks themselves, and per- 
haps a more keen hatred; because it is inflamed 


VI. | MACEDONIA. 311 


by a consciousness of military inferiority. On the 
other hand, the Greeks of these countries are ready 
to admit that they are much more secure now from 
the lawless depredations and highway robberies of 
the Albanians than they were before the extension 
of Aly’s power over these districts, when there was 
little safety in the roads ; and when Siatista among 
other places had often to resist the organized attacks 
of Albanian freebooters made in great force. Hence 
the houses of the town have all been built with a 
view to defence as well as comfort. Each has its 
small garden, but which, from the deficiency of 
water, serves only to supply a few vegetables in 
the spring and early summer. 

Sept. 5.—This forenoon, in company with Kyr 
N. and M. Renaud, I visit the Boghaz, or Klistra 
of Siatista, a remarkable pass, leading from the 
champaign country of the Injékara, or Vistritza, 
into the plain of Sarighioli. The latter name is a 
Turkish word, meaning yellow lake; the common 
use of which by the Greeks in preference to their 
synonym λίμνη κιτρινὴ, Shows that we here ap- 
proach the limit of the general use of the Greek 
language. Sarighioli comprehends a large extent 
of level country, subject to mundations, one of 
which is in part permanent'. We were twenty 


* It appears from Cantacu- 
zenus, l. 4, c. 19, that there 


sound, bearing ἃ particular 
meaning in their own language, 


was a place called Lrapidoda 
in this part of the country. 
May not the Turks in occupy- 
ing it have converted the Greek 
word into a name of similar 


and which was not inapplicable 
to the peculiarities of the dis- 
trict? We find in every coun- 
try names corrupted by foreign 
settlers in this manner. 


312 MACEDONIA. [CHAP. 


minutes in descending from Siatista through vine- 
yards to the beginning of the pass, from whence 
in one hour and twenty minutes more we arrived 
at the end, where it opens into a plain which 
branches off to the left behind the mountain of 
Siatista, and from thence conducts into the district 
of Kariani, or Karaianni, which, like Sarighioli 
and another named Djuma, to the eastward of the 
former and southward of the latter, is inhabited 
chiefly by Turks dispersed in many small villages. 
The whole of this champaign country is bounded 
eastward by a lofty range of mountains, branching 
northward from Olympus, and at the eastern foot 
of which stand the Greek towns of Vérria, Niausta, 
and Vodhena, on the edge of the great plain of 
Lower Macedonia, which extends to Saloniki. 
Karaianni is separated from Sarighioli by a ridge 
of inferior heights, and from the district of Kozani, 
which town is situated three or four hours east- 
ward of the Klistra, by other hills of greater ele- 
vation which branch from Mount Barino. 

The Klistra of Siatista is a valley about a quarter 
of a mile in width, included between the mountain 
of Siatista, which is a high white naked rock, and 
another mountain to the south equally steep and 
lofty, but green with shrubs. The latter is called 
Tjervéna’', and is connected to the southward with 
Barino: it is noted among the sportsmen of Sia- 
tista for its abundance of partridges. The vale of 
Klisira consists of open corn land, interspersed 
with wild pear-trees, which, though one of the 


1 Τζερβένα. 


- 


VI. | MACEDONIA. 313 


most common natives of Greece, are not indi- 
genous here, but are planted by the peasants, to 
whom they are recommended by the toughness of 
the wood serving many useful purposes in agricul- 
tural machinery, and by the dense shade of the tree, 
which never grows to such a height or expansion 
as to injure the corn. The lands of Karaianni and 
Siatista meet in the middle of the pass: near this 
spot stands the tomb of Selim Bey, of Monastir, 
who, after having been kept in prison at Ioannina 
seven years by the Vezir, was at last dismissed 
with an appearance of friendship; but on his way | 
home was strangled in his bed at Siatista by one 
of his own attendants. Having returned from the 
Klistira to Siatista, I set out from thence at 4.15, with 
the same two gentlemen as companions, for Sélitza, 
which lies in the opposite direction to the Klistra. 

There are two Hellenic ruins near Siatista, one 
on the face of Mount Tjervéna, three quarters of 
an hour distant from the lower makhala of Siatista, 
at a village which receives the name of Paledkastro 
from the ruins. The other bears the common Bul- 
garic name of Gradish, or Graditza, and stands on 
the highest point of the lower ridge of the Siatista 
mountain, in front of the upper town. Neither of 
them being of large dimensions, they may both, 
perhaps, have been fortresses, dependent upon a 
city which occupied the site of Siatista itself. By 
the learned of this place, Graditza is supposed to 
be the ancient Tyrissa, a Macedonian city noticed 
by Pliny and Ptolemy’, but as the latter places 


' Plin. 1. 4, c. 10. Ptolem. 1. 3, c. 10. 


314 MACEDONIA. [ CHAP. 


its name next to that of Europus in Emathia, there 
is reason to believe that Tyrissa was very far from 
hence to the north-eastward. Whatever the name 
may have been, the situation was of great import- 
ance, as commanding the principal entrance into 
Macedonia from the plains of the Haliacmon, which 
river was here the boundary between Upper Thes- 
saly and Upper Macedonia’. It seems to have 
been near Siatista that Domitius Calvinus was en- 
camped when opposed’ to Scipio, while Cesar was 
employed against Pompey in Illyria. We learn 
from the Commentaries that Scipio occupied some 
heights on the right bank of the river, at a distance 
of about six miles from the camp of Domitius. 
Scipio leaving twelve cohorts under Favonius, with 
orders to fortify his position, attempted to surprise 
Longinus, who commanded a legion of Cesarians 
in Thessaly, but was speedily recalled by Favonius, 
and returned just in time to prevent an attack upon 
him from the superior forces of Domitius. Soon 
after his return, Scipio crossed the river, but no 
action ensued ; and on the second night he found 
it prudent to resume his station on the right bank. 
In a subsequent attempt to surprise the enemy’s 
foragers, eighty of his cavalry were slain, and soon 
afterwards he was tempted to quit his strong posi- 
tion by a stratagem of Domitius, who pretended to 
retire for the sake of obtaining supplies, but with- 
drew only three miles into a pass, which con- 
cealed his whole force. The cavalry and light- 


1 ———-ad flumen Haliacmo- B.°C. 1. 3, c. 36.° Strabo, 
nem, quod Macedoniam ἃ p, 326, 4387. 
Thessalia dividit.—Czesar de 


V1. | MACEDONIA. 315 


armed in advance of Scipio, on entering the pass, 
discovered the ambuscade, but too late to prevent 
the loss of two turme and a prefect. The Kli- 
sura of Siatista seems perfectly adapted to this 
transaction from its nature and its situation rela- 
tively to the Halacmon, but still more as being 
the Gate which led from the extensive open coun- 
try watered by that river through Sarighidli, which 
was probably the ancient Eordea into Lyn- 
cestis; for we learn from Cesar, that Domitius 
afterwards really retired to Heraclia (of Lyncestis’), 
where he narrowly escaped from falling into the 
hands of the enemy, marching into Macedonia 
after his victory over Cesar at Dyrrhachium. A 
position in front of a pass, which secured the en- 
trance into a large extent of fertile country, was 
exactly such as we may suppose to have been 
chosen by Domitius for his camp. 


1 Caesar de B.C. L. 3, c. 79. 
The words are, ‘“ Heracliam 
Senticam, que est subjecta 
Candaviz,”’ where the last 
words clearly show that Senti- 
cam is an error either of Cesar 
or of the text, for Heraclia Sin- 
tica was towards the eastern 


extremity of Macedonia, where- 
as Candavia lay exactly in the 
route of Pompey from Dyrr- 
hachium to Heraclia of Lyn- 
cestis, so that, when Domitius 
marched thither from the Ha- 
liacmon, “‘ fortuna illum Pom- 
peio objicere videretur.” 


CHAPTER VII. 


MACEDONIA. 


River Pramoritza—Sélitza—Siséni—Mount Siniatziko—Bog- 
hatziko —Anaselitza—Bobushti— Smighes — Kastoria — lake 
—Celetrum — Kripista — Zelogésh — Kapesnitza — Devél— 
Biklista—klistra of Tzangon —Plidssa—Korytz4—Candavia 
—Votskop—Moskhopoli—Lavdhari—Rivers Khelidhoni and 
Devél—Mounts Ostrovitza, ‘Opari, Lénia—Dashari—Kom- 
méno-lithari—Dombréni—Mount Tomér—village of Tomdr 
—Tomoritza—Descent to Berat—River Uzimi—Berat, or 
Beligrad—Vezir Ibrahim—Mount Spiragr—Anitipatria. 


Sept. 5, (continued ).—Leaving the peak of Gra- 
ditza on the left, we descend the mountain from 
Siatista by a rocky road, and at 5 enter again the 
plain of the Vistritza; where near the foot of the 
mountain, to the left, the river Pramoritza joins 
the Vistritza below the village of Tzerusia. We 
continue our route along the foot of the ridge 
of Siatista, and at 6.20 arrive at Sélitza, which is 
situated in the hollow of a ravine descending 
from the summit of the same mountain, and at 
the head of a slope which towards the Vistritza is 
covered with vineyards. Numerous springs water 
the gardens of Sélitza, and render the situation 
preferable to that of Siatista in every respect ex- 
cept those of its healthy elevation and coolness 
in summer. Sélitza is two or three miles dis- 
tant from the river which here pursues a course 


CHAP. VII. | MACEDONIA. 317 


parallel to the foot of the mountains, and receives 
from them several small streams. The summit 
above Sélitza, which is higher than either of the 
other points of the same chain, namely, Barino, 
and the mountain of Siatista, is named Σινιάτζικον, 
vulgarly pronounced Sinatjko. On the other side 
of it are the villages Platissa and Pepelista, below 
which lies the plain of Sarighioli. 

In front of Sélitza, beyond the great valley 
of the Halacmon, the entire range of Pindus is 
presented to view, from the summits near Métzovo 
to a point beyond Korytza, called Xerovdani. 
Mount Smdlika, or Zmolska, above the Vlakhiote 
town of Samarina, is the most remarkable peak, 
beyond which, above the centre of the range, and to 
the left of Mount Smolika, is seen the great ser- 
rated rock called Lazari, which is near the village 
of Papingo in Zagori, and not far to the southward 
of Konitza. The undulated low country, which 
borders the Vistritza and its western branches, 
constitutes the district of Anaselitza, of which the 
Turkish Kassaba or capital, named Lapsista, is 
visible at the distance of a few miles to the west- 
ward. Sélitza formerly contained many Greek 
merchants trading to Germany, but having fallen 
into the hands of the Vezir Aly, it has been aban- 
doned by them. The houses are tolerably built, 
and have good gardens ; the vineyards yield a wine 
not much inferior to that of Siatista; the other cul- 
tivated lands produce wheat, barley, maize, and 
millet’; but none of the richer productions of 
lower Macedonia or Southern Greece are found in 


κεχρί. 


1 


318 MACEDONIA. [σπλρ. 


these cold regions; neither silk nor cotton, rice 
nor oil. An olive tree planted by the bishop 
in his garden at Siatista did not thrive after the 
second year. On my inquiring of the bishop for 
remains of antiquity, he sends for an inscription 
which he has partly traced in charcoal, and partly 
copied, but without attending to the lines of the 
original, from a marble still existing in a monastery 
near Sisani, which, though now only a small vil- 
lage, is one of the places from which his bishop- 
ric takes its title The monument shows that at 
Sisani, or near it, stood a city of some importance, 
but not named in the inscription,—an unfortunate 
omission, as the ancient authors have left no de- 
scription of this part of the country sufficiently pre- 
cise to supply the deficiency. Elimeia | should 
conceive to have been nearer to Grevena. The 
inscription is complete at the beginning, but im- 
perfect at the end; it contains a list of Ephebi, 
with the names of the gymnasiarch and ephe- 
barch, and a notice that the city supplied the oil 
for the gymnastic exercises. It is dated in the 
year 135, which, taken from the battle of Actium, 
corresponds to 105 from the birth of Christ, or the 
eighth year of the reign of Trajan’. 


1 Inscription at Sisani: 

᾿Αλειφούσης τῆς πόλεως" "Ἔτους ρλέ. "Apxovroc τοῦ γυμνασίου 
T. Κλαυδίου Ἰουλιανοῦ, ἐφηβαρχοῦντος Tr. Κλαυδίου Παριανοῦ, 
ἔφηβοι οἱ ὑπογεγραμμένοι. Πρόκλος ᾿Ιουλίου, Τέτος ΔΛύκας, 
Κλασίων, Αἴλιος Ἑὐφρόσυνος, Θεόφιλος ᾿Αλεξάνδρου, Φρασίδοτος, 
Τυχικὸς Kotvrov, Λύκος, Λούκιος Μάριος Ποταμὼν, Μάξιμος 
᾿Αφρόδειτος, ὙΨίγονος Ἑὐτάκτου, Στράτων᾽ Ἰουλιανοῦ, Σέκουνδος 
Φίλιππος Μακεδὼν, Evyeiac, “Τερτιανὸς Νικοπόλεως, ᾿Ιουλιαγνὸς 
Ποσειδὼν, Γαῖΐος ᾽Αντιπα. . sss Υ. Inscription No. 3. 


VII. | MACEDONIA. 319 


Sept. 6.—After treating the bishop with an. 
English breakfast, which seems not much to his 
taste, 1 proceed on horseback with my two com- 
panions to the monastery of St. Athanasius, situ- 
ated in a wood on the side of Mount Siniatziko, 
and afterwards to one of the nearer summits on 
foot, a laborious walk, and scarcely worth the 
fatigue, as the height commands no very important 
points that are not seen from below, with the ex- 
ception of Olympus, which rises above the ridge of 
Siniatzik6 in all its breadth and majesty, and shows 
its superiority to this range still more strikingly 
than from the plain. A little to the left of Olympus 
appears the mountain of Livadhi, or Vlakholivadho, 
a large Vlakhiote town, four hours beyond Sérvia, 
in the direction of Olympus. On a little elevated 
plain between us and the summit which rises above 
Siatista stands Konask6, a small village formerly 
noted for the skill of its inhabitants in the use of 
the musquet, their activity in climbing the moun- 
tains, and those other qualities of the independent 
mountaineers of Greece and Albania, one of which 
was generally a disposition to robbery. They have 
been subdued, and are now kept in quiet by the 
strong arm of Aly Pasha. 

The monastery contains at present no more 
than three monks, all the others being absent on 
their usual tours of begging, which sometimes 
carry them as far as Germany. The house 
is supported by these means, and by the pro- 
duce of a few corn-fields and sheep pastures in 
the bosom of the mountain, assisted by the pre- 
sents made to the church by the neighbour- 

12 


320 MACEDONIA. [CHAP. 


ing inhabitants, who often come in the summer to 
pass a day or two in this pleasant retreat, and on 
the festival of the saint, frequent it in considerable 
numbers. The monks are building a new konak 
for the accommodation of their profitable visitors, 
while a painter, who has the reputation of being 
one of the best in Greece, is employed in the 
church in retouching, new silvering, and gilding 
the pictures of the saints’. In the minutie of 
drapery, in the expression of muscles and features, 
his effect and finishing are remarkable, while the 
figures themselves are in the usual Greek taste, in- 
tolerably stiff and unnatural. But they resemble 
in many respects the early productions of the 
Italians, among whom the revived art of painting 
had its beginning in the pictures of the Greek 
church. The same painter is the most celebrated 
performer on the violin in this part of the country, 
and fails not to be in attendance whenever there is 
an assembly at the monastery. | 
At 3.20, taking leave of my two companions and 
the bishop, I proceed through the vineyards at the 
foot of the mountain, and cross at 3.50 a small 
branch of the Haliacmon, coming from the moun- 
tain on the right. Sisani stands on the right bank 
of this stream, at the distance of two hours from 
this spot. The hills seen up the glen are well 
wooded, and are not so high as the bare white 
summits above Sélitza and Siatista. We proceed 
over the barren roots of the mountain by a rugged 
road, having the river on our left, very near the 


1 Ν᾿ € , ἀρ 
τους αγίους εἰκονας. 


VII. | MACEDONIA. 321 


foot of the hills. At 5.25 we cross another tribu- 
tary of the Vistritza, where it emerges from an 
opening between steep banks, which leaves only a 
small level on either side of the stream, where are 
some mills and cultivated lands. Beyond the 
river we pass through a pleasant grove of oaks and 
elms, again cross the roots of the mountain, and 
arrive at 6 at Boghatziko, a large village situated 
at the head of a slope covered with vineyards, and 
immediately at the foot of the mountain, in a situa- 
tion very similar to that of Sélitza, except that here 
is no ravine at the back. The roads about the 
village are made practicable for wheel carriages, 
and the cars, instead of running on trucks, have 
wheels with spokes. It is the only place in Greece 
where I have seen agricultural mechanics in so 
advanced a state. Boghatziko is a Kefalo-khori, 
producing little grain, but a considerable quantity 
of wine. The principal inhabitants are masons 
and carpenters, who find work at Constantinople, 
and in the other principal towns of Turkey, and 
after residing there for several years return home 
with their gains. The village belongs to the eccle- 
siastical province of Sisanium and Satista, but like 
several others in this part of Macedonia, accounts 
for its taxes at Olossona. 

The district of Anaselitza, which extends in 
front of us, along the opposite side of the river, 
contains upwards of 100 villages, the greater part 
of which are small; about one half of the number 
are Turkish. In the opposite chain of moun- 
tains, a rocky summit, towering above the others, 
and bearing W.S.W., is called Rushotari. On 


VOL. I. Y 


322 MACEDONIA. [ CHAP. 


this side of it stands the Greek village of Tzoban, 
on the other Burbutziké. Between them is a 
dervéni, which leads from Anaselitza into the 
Albanian district of Kolonia, and the valleys of the 
upper Vidsa, or Aous. 

Sept. 7.—Sending forward my baggage by the 
direct road to Kastoria, 1 begin to descend at 6 
through the vineyards of Boghatziké, pass over a 
fine plain, quite uncultivated, and at 6.45 cross 
the Injékara, for the purpose of visiting Bobdshti, 
a small Turkish village situated on the summit of 
a steep bank above the river, where, agreeably to 
the information which I received at Boghatziko, 1 
find an ancient statue. It is of white marble, 
draped, and of the human size; the head is 
wanting, and the legs and feet are buried in the 
ground, in which manner it serves to support a 
stone trough, made to convey water to the village 
fountain. The right hand is folded in the mantle 
over the breast with the fist clenched, the left 
hand hangs down by the side. The drapery is 
heavy, and the whole performance indifferent. 
Near it are several wrought stones, which belonged 
to some ancient building ; but there is no appear- 
ance of any walls or other indications of the site 
of an ancient town. After a loss of three quarters 
of an hour at Bobushti, I follow the heights near 
the river, over a rich but uncultivated soil, and 
then descending from them, re-cross the Injékara 
at 8 by the bridge of Smighes, probably so called 
because the river just below it is joined by another 
stream which issues from the Lake of Kastoria. 
This point is less than an hour from Boghatziké 


VII. | MACEDONIA. 323 


by the direct road. At the bridge the slope of the 
mountain reaches to the left bank of the river. 
We now cross a plain higher than the level of the | 
river; at its extremity to the right is the Lake of 
Kastoria, on the margin of which we arrive at 
9.30. The waters are stagnant, putrescent at the 
edge, and entirely covered with a green pellicle. 
The town appears on the opposite side, built on 
an isthmus, which connects a high rocky penin- 
sula with the north-western shore. The peninsula 
extends into the middle of the lake, and a large 
monastery is seen at its extremity on the water 
side. Having skirted the western shore of the 
lake, we enter some gardens abounding in walnut 
trees, and halt among them at 10.10, near the 
gate of the town, waiting for the return of the 
tatar, whom I had sent forward to provide a 
lodging, with a letter of recommendation from 
Siatista, to Kyr T. K., one of the primati. 
After some delay we are conducted to the house 
of a papas, where ἱ am soon afterwards visited by 
Kyr K., who is now very pressing that I should 
remove to his house, which, under the circum- 
stances, I decline, though my konak is humble 
enough, compared with the handsome houses of 
some of the Greek merchants, particularly that of 
Kyr K. himself. It would seem that the merchants 
of these Macedonian towns have lost something of 
the barbarous virtue of hospitality by a residence 
in civilized Europe, though at Kastoria something 
may perhaps be ascribed to an anxiety to resist 
every infringement of an ancient privilege which 
exempts the Greeks of this place from the bur- 


y 2 


324 MACEDONIA. | CHAP. 


then of lodging passengers. A traveller is the 
more sensible to this difference of reception, as 
the Greeks in general are eminently of a social 
character, and practise hospitality to a degree 
which could hardly be expected in their poor and 
oppressed condition. But without this advantage, 
travelling in the Levant would hardly be tolerable ; 
for although the traveller may, by the power of 
his firmahn and of Turkish attendants, force his 
way into the Christian houses, he would be dis- 
appointed in his objects of inquiry if he were 
not generally met by a disposition to hospitality. 
This indeed is the most agreeable characteristic 
of Oriental travelling, as it gives the travelier a 
better view of manners than can possibly be ob- 
tained in civilized Europe, in moving from one 
inn to another, and thus more than compensates 
for the inconveniences arising from the want of 
public accommodation. In point of expense, there 
is no saving, or rather, notwithstanding the greater 
value of money in Turkey, the Oriental mode is 
the more expensive of the two, the traveller’s 
attendants being more numerous than are neces- 
sary in civilized Europe, and the presents which 
he makes at departing to the lower class of house- 
holders with whom he lodges, or to the servants 
of the rich, ainounting generally to as much as 
would pay the bill at the most expensive inn in 
Christendom. I met with a similar delay at 
Métzovo as at Kastoria in obtaining a lodging, 
and at Siatista should probably have found still 
greater than that which occurred, had not KyrN., 
being a nephew of a bishop, been particularly fearful 
of offending the Vezir’s musafir, or stranger guest. 


Vu. | MACEDONIA. 325 


Kastoria', or, according to the vulgar trans- 
position of the accent in this termination, . Kas- 
toria, contains about 600 families, of whom the 
Jews form a tenth, and the remainder is divided 
equally between Turks and Greeks. All the 
population of the villages is Greek, with the 
exception of a subashi, or agent, in some of 
the Turkish tjiftliks. The present Turkish com- 
mandant is Demir Bey, who pays the Porte 25 
purses a year for the mukata, or farm of the 
revenue of the district, which includes fifty vil 
lages. His family is of long standing at Kas- 
toria; Mehmét, the head of the house, is now at 
‘Akhridha with his troops, on the public service ; 
for these Beys, being Timariots, hold their lands 
on condition of personal service, and are bound 
to the maintenance of a certain number of men, 
who receive provisions from the government when 
called into the field. A third brother resides at 
loannina by command of Aly Pasha, who gene- 
rally takes care to keep one member of every 
principal family near him. Their father was be- 
headed by the Porte. 

The Lake of Kastoria is reckoned a six hours’ 
ride in circumference, but does not appear to me 
to be above six miles long and four broad. The 
peninsula is near four miles in circumference, and 
the outer point is not far from the centre of the 
lake. In the evening I make the tour of the pe- 
ninsula in a canoe, in company with Kyr Κα. The 
monoxyla of this lake are longer and better made 


A Kaorwpeia. 


326 MACEDONIA. [CHAP. 


than those of the Lake of Ioannina; that in which 
I embark is 15 feet in length, so deep that a man 
sitting down at the bottom is quite concealed, and 
is capable of holding thirty persons '. é 





The two ends, which are exactly alike, are raised 
above the gunwhale, and hollowed within, so as 
to furnish a very comfortable seat with a back, 
while by their form they improve the outward 
appearance of the boat. Towards the stern, two 
outriggers, with an upright at the extremity of 
them, furnish a pivot for the oars, which thus 
placed have great power, and are capable of turn- 
ing the boat round upon the head, as a centre, 
with remarkable quickness and ease. The annual 
value of the fish caught in this lake amounts to 
100 purses. Besides the quantity consumed fresh 
in the town and surrounding villages, which are 
supplied from hence in winter, as far as Korytza, a 


* The μονόξυλα πλοῖα of the 
Danube are mentioned by Ar- 
rian, de exp. Alex. 1. 1, c. 3, 
and those of the Rhone by 
Polybius, 1. 3, c. 42. Pliny, 
Η. Ν. 1. 16, c. 40, states that 
some of the canoes of Germany 


formed of a single tree con- 
tained 80 men. Those of Kas- 
torla are generally formed out 
of a single tree, but a part of 
the upper works are sometimes 
of a different piece. 


VIL. | MACEDONIA. 327 


large proportion is salted and meets a ready market 
in every part of Macedonia and Thessaly. Though 
the lake is now entirely covered with a green 
surface, and the water is hot, turbid, and by no 
means tasteless, it is preferred for drinking to the 
water of the wells, and of some fine springs at the 
foot of the hills beyond the gardens, which are all 
considered as βαρυὰ νερὰ, or heavy waters. In 
fact, when cooled in jars, the lake water is not 
disagreeable, though I should never have thought 
of preferring it to the clear and sparkling produce 
of the springs; but the Greeks are extremely 
curious upon the subject of the quality of water, 
and attentive to its possible effects upon their 
health ; in which they are prudent, as they drink 
an immense quantity of it in summer, especially 
im those fasts when they live chiefly on salted 
provisions. The fish of the lake are carp, tench, 
eels, and the γουλιανός ἦ ; carp are taken, weighing 
15 okes, eels 4 okes, and Kyr K. has seen a 
guliands weighed of 64 okes, or 176lbs., but 
they are sometimes much larger. The fishery 
of the lake, which forms part of the Mukata, is 
let by Demir Bey for 12 purses to Hassan Efféndi, 
who exacts from the fishermen of the town one 
third of the produce of the sale, and grants the 
privilege to those of Topiakos, a village on the 
side of the lake, for 10 piastres a year to each 
person. All modes of fishing are allowed; the 
Topiakiotes chiefly employ traps, and the Kas- 
torites round spreading nets, or sees, which are 
sometimes 200 ὀργυιαὶς in length. 


1 Silurus Glanis. 


328 MACEDONIA. [ CHAP. 


The lake is frozen over occasionally when the 
north winds are constant in winter ; seven or eight 
years ago carts passed across upon the ice. 

The Lake of Okhri, in Greek ’Akhridha, and 
sometimes ‘Okhridha’, differs essentially from that 
of Kastoria. Its waters are extremely bright and 
clear, though perfectly sweet and fresh. It never 
freezes, and abounds in trout, which are not found 
in the Lake of Kastoria. 

The present fortification of Kastoria consists only 
of a wall across the western extremity of the isth- 
mus, which was built in the time of the Byzantine 
Empire, and has a wet ditch, making the penin- 
sula an island. The wall has been slightly re- 
newed by the Turks, who keep it well white- 
washed, which among them often serves instead 
of a repair. In the middle of the wall stands a 
square tower, through which is the only entrance 
into the town. A parallel wall, flanked with round 
towers, which in Byzantine times crossed the pe- 
ninsula from shore to shore, and excluded all the 
eastern part of it, although now in ruins, still 
divides the Kassaba, or quarter of the Turks, from 
that of the Greeks, whose town occupies the middle 
of the peninsula, and extends down to the water 
on either side of it. 

The remainder of the peninsula eastward of the. 
Greek quarter is a high rock, bare and uncultiva- 
ble, and which intercepts from the town the view 
of all the southern and of great part of the eastern 
side of the lake. There are many small churches 
of ancient date in different parts of the peninsula, 


1 στὴν Αχριδα,"Οχριδα, the” Axprc of the Byzantine authors. 


VII. | MACEDONIA. 329 


which are said to have been built by persons 
banished from the capital, and confined here by the 
Greek emperors. The accurate description of Cas- 
toria by Anna Comnena, shows that no great 
change has occurred since the twelfth century’. 

At the eastern extremity of the lake is a large 
village named Mavrovo. Here begins a long and 
well-cultivated plain, bounded to the south by the 
hills, the opposite side of which we followed from 
Sélitza, and to the north by the ridge of Siniatziko, 
‘which, taking a more northerly direction than to- 
wards Siatista, embraces the plain, and joins the 
mountains which bound the lake on the northern 
side. 

The hills at the eastern end of the plain of Mav- 
rovo separate it from that of Sarighioli. North- 
eastward of Kastoria is the lofty summit called 
Vitsh, written in Greek Βίτζη. It is the same 
which I saw bearing N. 22 Τὰ. from Mount Kakar- 
dhista, and is a very remarkable bare abrupt peak, 
having a region of pines below it. The road from 
Mavrovo to Kaliari leaves it on the left in passing 
‘the ridge which separates the plains. Midway in 
this route is situated Vlakho-klistra, the name of 
which explains both the origin of the inhabitants 
and the situation of the place. 

The scenery around Kastoria is extremely beau- 
tiful. ‘Trees and verdure adorn the higher parts 
of the mountain, and below are small villages and 
cultivation mixed with woods. To the N.W. and 
W. the lowest slopes are green with vineyards ; 
and below them a narrow plain stretches along the 
margin of the lake, which on either side of the gar- 


* Anna Comnena, ]. 6, p. 152. Paris. 


330 MACEDONIA. [ CHAP. 


dens, near the entrance of the town, is covered 
with walnut-trees and poplars, mixed with corn- 
fields. To the south a plain of corn land extends 
to the hills of Boghatzik6 and to the Injékara. In 
every other direction except at the eastern extre- 
mity, the slopes of the hills reach to the margin : 
from the southern extremity of the lake issues the 
stream which joins the Injékara at Smighes. At 
the point of its exit from the lake the Topiakiotes 
catch an abundance of crayfish. 

The ecclesiastical province of Kastoria is very ex- 
tensive, but the bishop, although metropolitan, is, 
together with those of Grevena, Pelagonia, Vodhena, 
Korytza, Berat, and Stramnitza, considered subject 
to the archbishop of ‘Akhridha. To the north the 
province is synorous with that of Pelagonia or Bitolia; 
and extends to the west into Albania, where it in- 
cludes Koldénia, which has a suffragan bishop. 

Of the Hellenic name of this remarkable position 
we should have been left in ignorance, but for a single 
passage in Livy, which leaves no room for a doubt 
that it is the site of Celetrum, and thus affords a most 
useful point for the adjustment of the comparative 
geography of the surrounding part of Macedonia, 
which, although still sufficiently obscure, would, 
without this aid, have been much more uncertain. 
In the first Macedonian campaign of the Romans, 
B.C. 200, the consul Sulpicius marched from the 
banks of the Apsus through the country of the 
Dassaretii into Lyncestis, and from thence, after 
an engagement with Philip at Octolophus, forced 
the passes which separate the valley of the river 
Erigon from Eordea. From the latter province he 
moved into Elimza, and from thence into Orestis : 


Vil. | MACEDONIA. 331 


here he invested Celetrum, ‘‘ a town situated on a 
peninsula which is surrounded by the waters of a 
lake, and has only a single entrance over a narrow 
isthmus which connects it with the continent '.” 
Having received the submission of Celetrum, the 
consul returned into Dassaretia, and from thence 
regained Apollonia, the place from whence he had 
departed on this expedition. 

The travelled men of Kastoria seem not more 
anxious about education than their fellow-country- 
men in general: nothing more being taught in 
the school, which they support here, than the 
mere rudiments of the ancient language. So pow- 
erful is the effect of the Turkish system, that all 
those who dwell long in the country seem inevita- 
bly to feel the effects of this moral atmosphere by 
a want of energy and an indifference to every thing 
but the vulgar pursuits of life, or to their personal 
safety, which, being always insome danger, affords 
therefore some excuse for their conduct. Even 
those who return after a long residence im civilized 
Europe, are seldom tardy in resuming the general 
feeling, and among other indications of it, make 
none but the feeblest exertions for the improvement 
of the rising generation. It is almost entirely to 
the Greeks permanently settled in foreign countries, 
and to some of their countrymen at Constantinople, 
that Greece is indebted for the progress she has 


* Inde impetum in Oresti- cingit: angustis faucibus unum 
dem fecit: et oppidum Cele- ex continente iter est.—Liv. 
trum est aggressus, in penin- 1. 31, c. 40. | 
sula situm. Lacus meenia , 


332 MACEDONIA. : [CHAP. 


made of late years in education, and that progress, 
therefore, although constant, is slow on the conti- 
nent of Greece. Few men are to be found here 
who have any curiosity as to the ancient geography 
or history of their country; and even the young 
men who have had the benefit of an European 
education, soon lose their literary taste and acquire- 
ments, when they are settled in their native land, 
where, straightened, perhaps, for the means of exist- 
ence, living under a constant necessity of deceiving 
their oppressors, and deprived of all instructive con- 
versation, they soon become entirely occupied with 
the only objects which a government such as the 
Turkish leaves open to them. Nevertheless, it 
must be acknowledged, that in these matters the 
continent of Greece has been exemplary, compared 
with the islands of the western coast, where the 
vicious government of Venice seems to have been 
more effectual even than the Turkish in repressing 
the natural disposition of the Greeks for mental 
improvement. The Greeks of Kastoria are some-_ 
what less exposed than those of Kozani, Siatista, 
Sélitza, and Korytza, to the exactions of Aly 
Pasha, which have driven away so many from 
those places. Enough, however, has been done 
to thin Kastoria of its inhabitants; and several of 
the large houses, both of the Greeks and Jews, 
are falling to ruin, or standing empty. 

Sept. 8.—This afternoon we cross in half an 
hour the hills to the westward of Kastoria, and de- 
scend into the plain of the Injékara, where the 
junction of its two principal branches is half a mile 
to the left. In another hour we cross that which 


VI. | MACEDONIA. 333 


comes from Tzélova, a village in the mountains 
towards ΕἸ] τίμα, and enters the plain through a 
narrow opening just above the place where we 
cross it. The village of Sligani is in the glen half 
a mile to the right. The other, or western branch 
of the river, which originates in the great moun- 
tains on that side, after winding through gorges in 
the lower hills of that range, enters at a point 
bearing about N. 60 W. from Kastoria the open 
champaign country ten or twelve miles in breadth, 
which separates those mountains from the heights 
near Kastoria. Ona ridge along the right bank 
of the river are situated several Turkish villages, 
of which the principal are Zelogosh and Krapista. 
The latter was not far to our left at 4.30, and Zelo- 
gdésh was at five miles in direct distance in the 
same direction at 5.10 as we mounted some heights 
which close the plain to the northward, and which 
are the barren roots of a range of mountains run- 
ning north-westward from Kastoria. Near Zelo- 
gdésh, which stands on a rising ground, the river 
flows from the west, and receives several small 
branches from the mountains. After having 
crossed the heights we arrive at 8.10 at Kapes- 
nitza, and there descend into a valley, the direc- 
tion of which is parallel to that of the Pindian 
range. 

The waters which collect in this valley from the 
surrounding mountains, form a stream flowing to 
the north-westward, and thus the low ridge which 
we crossed separates the waters running to the 
Hahacmon and the Avgean sea from those which 
flow to the Adriatic. The valley, with its includ- 


334 MACEDONIA. | CHAP. 


ing mountains, as well as the country to the north- 
ward, to within a short distance of the Lake of 
‘Akhridha, is called Devél. The river bears the 
same name. At its sources, in the western ridge, 
are the villages Nikholitza and Bushigrad; to the 
southward of which, in the same great range, 1s 
the town and district of Gramista. 

After following for a short distance the foot of 
hills on our right, we arrive at 8.40 at a khan 
situated on the road side below Biklista, a Maho- 
metan village with two large serais belonging to 
Aly Bey, who owns the neighbouring lands. Bik- 
lista may be considered the frontier village of Al- 
bania, as the inhabitants speak that language. The 
valley, like most of those in Albania, is chiefly 
cultivated with maize. Near the town are a few 
gardens of melons and pumpkins. The vale is 
three or four miles in width, bounded to the west- 
ward by hills of no great height, but connected 
with the high range. 

Sept. 9.—At 6 this morning I proceed from the 
khan to the Boghaz or pass of Tjangon, situated 
at the extremity of the vale of Biklista, to the 
N.N.W. of that town. In three quarters of an 
hour a narrow glen opens on our right, from which 
issues a small river, said to originate in a lake in 
the district of Prespa, called Ventrok. At the 
mouth of the glen is a narrow level, on which 
stands the village of Tren. A high mountain is 
seen through the opening, having a direction of 
north and south. The plain is now three miles in 
breadth. Leaving several small villages to the 
right at the foot of the mountain, we cross at 7 the 


VII. | MACEDONIA. 335 


river Devél, which, not having yet received that 
of Tren, is still very small. At 7.40 Tjangon, a 
small Moslém village, is on the left, on the foot of 
the heights, which form the pass on the southern 
side. Here we halt eighteen minutes, then pro- 
ceeding, arrive at 8.15 at the narrowest part of the 
pass, where the river, now greatly increased in 
size, occupies all the space. Here they are build- 
ing a new bridge. 

The Pass of Tjangoén, or Klistra of Devél, as it 
may be called, and probably would be if the Greeks 
were more numerous in this part of the country, is 
a remarkable feature in the geography of Upper 
Macedonia. Like the Klistra of Siatista, it is a 
natural gate of communication from the champaign 
eountry of the Halhacmon into other extensive 
plains, and it is moreover the only break in the 
great central range of Pindus, from its southern 
commencement in the mountains of A%tolia, to 
where it is blended to the northward with the 
summits of Hemus and Rhodope. The pass is not 
as strong as it is narrow, the hills which immedi- 
ately border it on either side being not very abrupt. 
But they soon become steep and lofty, and the 
great rocky summit to the north called Kuradagh, 
Grece Xerovini, is a suitable link to the chain, 
formed by the great summits Ghrammos, Russo- 
tari, and Smolika. Beyond the bridge we turn 
immediately to the south, enter the great plain of 
Korytza, and pass along the foot of some hills con- 
nected at the back with the central ridge. On our 
right in the plain are several Albanian villages, 
situated between Xerovuani and the Devél. The 

12 


336 MACEDONIA. [ CHAP. 


largest is Poyani, on the right bank of that river, 
which flows from thence to the north-west, enters a 
large lake towards that extremity of the plain, and 
on emerging from it, begins to wind through a 
succession of narrow valleys among the great range 
of mountains which border the plain of Korytza on 
the west. In its progress through them, the Devol 
receives several large tributaries, and finally joins 
the Beratinos, or ancient Apsus, two hours below 
Berat, in the great maritime plain of Ldlyria. 

At 8.55 we pass through Pliassa, a small village 
at the foot of the mountain, remarkable for a very 
large serai, which was built here not long ago 
by one Mehmét Pasha, an Albanian of large pos- 
sessions in the neighbouring plain, whose family is — 
connected by marriage with that of Aly of Tepe- 
léni. Mehmét died suddenly last winter at loan- 
nina, where his son Vely¥ is still detained by the 
Vezir Aly: the other sons are here. Continuing 
along the foot of the hills, we arrive at 10.20 at 
Korytza, which is situated entirely in the plain, 
though separated only by some vineyards from a 
projection of the mountain, which is crowned by a 
ruined castle. It is a structure probably of the 
Bulgarians, though vulgar report attributes it to 
the Spaniards. 

As there are some doubts whether the plague, 
which broke out here about eight months ago, has 
entirely ceased, I pitch my tent on the outside of 
the town, but on receiving, after the delay of an 
hour, an assurance from the Bey that the Greek 
quarter is entirely free from suspicion, remove to 
the metropolis. The bishop returns to town in the 


vil. | MACEDONIA. 337 


evening from the village of Bobushtitza, on hearing 
of my arrival, but not before I had taken possession 
of his apartment, the only comfortable one in the 
metropolitan palace; the others, which are inha- 
bited by the archdeacon and deacons, being all 
ruinous, exposed to the weather, and covered with 
smoke and dirt. The bishop’s closet, which mea- 
sures ten feet by six, has two small glazed windows, 
a sofa on two sides, ashelf in one corner piled with 
ecclesiastical books, and other shelves on which 
are ranged plates made of pewter, or of German 
earthenware. Affixed to one wall, as customary 
in Greek houses, is a deal case, containing a pic- 
ture of the Virgin, with a lamp perpetually burn- 
ing before it. A German clock, the pastoral staff, 
and a Ξύστρι, or scratching machine made of hard 
wood scored with furrows, complete the list of fur- 
niture. 

Sept. 10.—Korytza, vulgarly pronounced Gortja, 
or Gkiortja', and by the Albanians Ghidrghia, con- 
tains about 450 houses, of which more than a half 
are Christian. The filthy streets and comfortless 
habitations proclaim the Albanian town. Its arti- 
zans manufacture most of the articles of Albanian 
dress and furniture; and the snuil of Korytza, 
which is made chiefly from the tobacco of Arta, is 
in good repute. 

One of the most ordinary causes of delay to the 
traveller in Turkey, which I experience to-day, is 
the want of horses, generally caused by the insuf- 
ficient capital of the farmer of the post, so that 


* Κορυτζὰ, Γκιορτζά. 
VOL. I. Ζ 


338 MACEDONIA. [ CHAP. 


whenever there is an uncommon influx of tatars, 
or a Pasha passes through, the traveller who fol- 
lows has no alternative but to wait for the return 
of the horses.. Abdullah Pasha passed through 
Korytza two days ago on his way to Okhri. He is. 
a pretender to the Pashalik of Elbassan, and is 
supported in his pretensions by Aly Pasha, but he 
has no less than three rivals, two of whom are from 
the northern part of Albania, where the Skodrian 
has the chief power: the third Ibrahim is in actual 
possession of the place, and is supported there by 
the troops of the Vezir of Berat, after a war be- 
tween Berdt and Skodra, which has ceased now 
that the Beratinés has gained his object. But as 
Aly has an interest in reviving the contest, it will 
not be long, probably, before hostilities recom- 
mence. 

At dinner, the bishop not being able to resist 
the Frank cookery of my servant, breaks the fast, 
but sets the archdeacon at the door to prevent 
intruders. He has a plate of octapddhi, or salted 
starfish, set before him, and takes care neither to 
change his plate, nor to allow more than one 
excavation to appear in the pudding and _ pilaf. 
He produces from his cellar a light dry wine, 
which is made from the vineyards on the hills 
near the town, and is not inferior to the wine of 
Siatista. His all-holiness, or high priestship', as 
a metropolitan bishop is styled, was a deacon for 
many years at Kastoria, and purchased his present 
dignity from the Porte in the usual manner. On 


* ἡ Πανιερότητου. 


vil. | MACEDONIA. 339 


appointing a Bishop, or rather on approving the 
recommendation of the Patriarch, the Porte gives 
a seal, in the centre of which is written the name, 
in Turkish, of the manstp, or office, and round 
its edge the Greek Title. The bishop found his 
see burthened with a debt of 50 purses, bearing 
an interest of 12 per cent., which, on account of 
the growing poverty and depopulation of the 
country, his province will scarcely ever be able to 
pay. The metropolitan bishopric of Korytz4 and 
Selasforo' comprehends the country to the west- 
ward of Korytza half way to Berat, includes Pre- 
medi and Tepeléni to the southward and westward, 
and in the opposite direction Devol. Selasforo is 
now a village by the Turks called Svesde, situated 
at the foot of Mount Xerovuini, 3 hours north of 
Korytza. There is a remark in the Notitiz Epis- 
copatuum Grecorum, of the date of the 13th 
century, that Selasforo was then better known 
as Deabolis; Dev6l is the modern form, or ra- 
ther, perhaps, Devél was always the local name, 
and Deabolis the Greek version of it. In the 
eleventh century, Anna Comnena described Dea- 
bolis as a town situated at the foot of a moun- 
tain, (thus agreeing with Selasforo,) and in- 
forms us that Alexius frequently occupied it in 
his campaigns against the Normans, when the 
latter first obtained a footing in Illyria’. It is 
evident from Anna’s narrative, that Achris and 
Deabolis were then the two places of chief im- 


* Κορυτζᾶς καὶ Σελασφόρου. * Anna Comnen. Il. 5. 18, 
pp. 126. 328. Paris. 
y ay 


340 MACEDONIA. [CHAP. 


portance to the eastward of the Candavian range, 
but though many other names, still existing, or 
slightly corrupted, occur also in that part of her 
history, there is no trace of that of Korytza. A 
bishop of Deabolis was instrumental in having 
first invited the Normans into this country from 
Italy’. 

There are 80 villages and 2800 Greek houses 
in the episcopal province of Korytza; as the 
bishop receives 8 paras from each house, his 
regular income is between five and six hundred 
piastres, or about 36/. sterling. His other emolu- 
ments consist in customary presents of provisions, 
and in fees which are chiefly for the arrangement 
of disputes among the laity. In the larger sees, 
such as Larissa and loannina, where the clergy 
are more numerous, and there are Greek families 
of opulence, the bishop demands a portion of the 
profits derived by the former from the confessions, 
domestic services, and the ἐφημερίαις, or daily 
prayers, which are read in many families by a 
priest. But Korytza produces very little to its 
bishop in this way. 

In common with many of the Greek clergy, my 
host is desirous of an union of the Greek and Latin 
churches, entertains a very indifferent opinion of 
his own countrymen, but ascribes the ruin of the 
country principally to the Musulman Albanians, 
whose power and tyranny have arrived at such a 
height, that Turks and Christians agree in wishing 
for the arrival of a Frank conqueror. Hence he has 


* Scylitzes, p. 865, ed. Paris. ῷ 


vil. | MACEDONIA. 341 


always considered Bonaparte deficient in policy, 
in having gone to Egypt instead of coming here, 
where the consequences would have been much 
more important, and from whence he could not 
have been driven out. The bishop admits, how- 
ever, that the three Vezirs of loannina, Berat, and 
Skodra, could collect 50,000 men in a short time, 
and that an army landing at Avlona, and advanc- 
ing as far as Berat, would be unable to proceed 
from a want of provisions, Albania producing 
nothing but men, and this fine looking plain re- 
turning very little to the cultivator. It is said 
that the fig, which so near as Premedi ripens at 
the usual time, here seldom comes to perfection ; 
from the present appearance of the vines, indeed, 
it is evident that the climate is that of a much 
more northern latitude, and the soil may be less 
fertile, than that of Anaselitza and Kastoria; but 
a want of security, industry, and good agriculture, 
are probably the chief causes of the scanty har- 
vests ; for we learn from Livy, that these plains 
furnished an abundance of forage to the Roman 
army, under the consul Sulpicius, in the cam- 
paign of the year 200 8.6. ὦ 

The bishop’s geography and history ascend no 
higher than the Bulgarian conquest of this country, 
which he considers as a part of Παλαιὰ Βουλγαρία, 
or Old Bulgaria, subdued and in part peopled by 
Albanian freebooters. As a proof of this fact, he 
instances some Bulgarian names, such as Belo- 
voda (white water), a village and river in the neigh- 


ἜΠΗ: ΟΝ 99: 


342 MACEDONIA. [CHAP. 


bouring mountain,—Bushigrad and several others. 
But names of [llyric origin are found in every part 
of Greece. A stronger proof is the use of the 
Bulgarian language, which is still spoken in 
some of the villages of this district. The plain 
of Korytza is about 20 miles long, and from 6 to 
10 wide, terminated at either end by hills of no 
great height, of which those to the northward fur- 
nish an easy passage into the great valley of ‘Akh- 
ridha, which is occupied in great part by the lake an- 
ciently named Lychnidus. The town of ‘Akhridha 
lies nearly due north from hence, distant twelve 
hours near the northern extremity of the lake. South- 
ward of the plain of Korytza are hills forming a dis- 
trict called Kiari, beyond which is Kolonia, and the 
sources of the branch of the Apsus, which flows 
by Viskuki and Skrepari to Berat. The district 
of Koldnia begins on the other side of Mount 
Pepélas, which branches from the mountain of 
Gramista in a south-western direction, and falls to 
the southern end of the plain of Korytza. From 
the western and north-western side of the plain 
rises a range of very lofty mountains, on the sides 
of which are seen villages, and cultivation on the 
middle and lower slopes, and behind them tower- 
ing summits, known by the names of Lénia and 
‘Opari. Farther south other lofty ridges are in 
sight, as far as the great serrated mountain near 
Premedi, named Nemértzika, which bears from 
hence S. 49 W. by compass. The hills are lowest 
to the northward beyond Selasforo, where appear 
some very high and distant mountains beyond 
'Akhridha, between which and Mount Lénia is seen 


VII. | MACEDONIA. 343 


the mountain of Elbassan, which I take to be the 
proper Candavia; it bears N. 23 W. by compass. 
The boghaz, or gorge through which the river 
Dev6l enters the mountains, after emerging from 
the lake, bears N. 11 W. 

Sept. 11—This morning at 7.35 I set out for 
Berat in the rain, with a wretched set of horses, 
procured from the menzil, and crossing the plain 
directly in its breadth, and nearly in a due westerly 
direction, arrive at 8.45 at Votskop, which name 
is now applied to two small villages on the last 
root of the mountains. They are the remains of 
an old Wallachian colony, which at the time of 
the Turkish conquest possessed the circumjacent 
district, and was very populous, but in conse- 
quence of that event was dispersed. A part of 
them retired to a situation in the neighbouring 
mountain, where they founded the town of Vos- 
kopoli; the security of the situation attracted 
thither numerous settlers from Greece and other 
parts of European Turkey, who having traded to 
Germany and rendered the place opulent, became 
ashamed at length of inhabiting the city of the 
Shepherds, and changed the name therefore to 
Moskopoli, or Moskhépoli, which, meaning the 
city of Calves, seems no great improvement. I 
have frequently heard the assertion, that the town 
once contained eight or ten thousand houses, but 
have great difficulty in believing even the smaller 
of these numbers. Its greatest prosperity was 
about a century ago; for seventy years it has been 
declining, and for the last ten so rapidly, that at 
present there are only two or three hundred in- 


344 MACEDONIA. [CHAP. 


habited houses in the place. After ascending the 
hills for three quarters of an hour from Votskop, 
we enter open cultivable hills and downs, which, 
compared with the. steep ascent from Votskop, 
- and the abruptness of the mountains around, may 
be almost termed a plain. At the end of it, δῇ. 
10.45, we arrive at Moskdépoli, situated at the 
foot of a very lofty summit. Whatever it may 
once have been, Moskopoli now presents only the 
appearance of a large village surrounded with 
gardens, in which the Lombardy poplar is very 
frequent,—a tree common in these mountains, but 
apparently not indigenous, as it is found only 
near the villages. 

For a considerable distance round the town are 
seen the ruins of houses, most of which were of 
small dimensions, and altogether cannot have 
amounted to more than a thousand. It is very 
possible, however, that these ruins are much pos- 
terior to the great decline of the place. Among 
them are several small tents and temporary cover- 
ings, tenanted by families which have been obliged 
to retire out of the village, under suspicion of being 
infected with the same contagious disease which 
raged at Korytza. The disorder, however, is not 
the proper plague, or it has been unusually mild 
in its effects, for not more than forty have died at 
Korytza in eight months, and here about fifty in 
the last two months, at the beginning of which 
time the disease first made its appearance. 

Having lost a quarter of an hour by a circuit, to 
avoid passing through the village, we regain the 
direct road, cross some barren heights grown with 


VII. | MACEDONIA. 345 


brushwood and wild strawberries, and at about 
12.30, having gained the highest part of the ridge, 
descend to a stream flowing from the left towards 
the west, over a wide stony bed between steep 
mountains, whose sides are well peopled with 
small villages. We descend by a zigzag path, 
and cross the river at 1.25; then, ascending the 
mountain of ‘Opari, at 2.30 arrive at Lavdhari, a 
small village of Greeks, or rather Christian Al- 
banians, and the ordinary residence of Shem- 
seddin Bey, son of Mehmét Pasha, of Frashari’, 
which place is under the authority of Aly Pasha. 
After a long delay, caused by the conduct of the 
tatar, who, instead of searching for a lodging for 
me, demanded a contribution of money for him- 
self, I obtain admission into a long apartment, 
open to the roof, and belonging to the Papas, who 
is likewise Proestés of the Greek community. At 
one end of the room is a ladder descending to the 
ground floor, which is a stable, and at the other 
end a fire-place. The dispute between the tatar 
and Proestés continues after our arrival; the for- 
mer asserting that the Papas has a better house, 
the latter swearing that he has not, by the Christ, 
by the Cross, by the Bread, by the Virgin’, which 
is the orthodox ascending climax of Greek asse- 
veration. 

The summit rising immediately above Lavdhari 
is here known by the name of Ostrovitza: from 
Korytza it bore N. 86 W. by compass. The river 


᾿ Φράσσιαρι. Σταυρὸν, μὰ τὸ Ψωμὶ, μὰ τὴν 
2 μὰ τὸν Χριστὸν, pa roy Παναγίαν. 


346 MACEDONIA. [CHAP. 


which we crossed is called the Khelidhéni; a 
Greek name and probably ancient. It joins the 
Devo6l at the foot of Mount Lénia, which appears 
before us to the north-west, and is not much in- 
ferior to the great Tomér in its height and im- 
posing appearance; the latter mountain is hid 
from us by the range of ‘Opari, or Khdépari, nor 
was it visible from Korytza. - Mount Khépari is a 
westerly continuation of Mount Ostrovitza, and 
closes the hollow watered by the Khelidhoni. Both 
these summits, as well as Lénia, are thickly stud- 
ded on their lower slopes with villages surrounded 
by cultivation, so that the mountains seem to be 
inhabited beyond their powers of production, while 
the plains are deserted,—a circumstance to be 
ascribed to the bad government of the Turks, and 
to the difference between their military character 
and that of the Albanians. Inferior as horsemen, 
the latter are unable to maintain themselves in 
the plains, while their hardiness, activity, and 
greater skill in the use of the musquet are well 
adapted to the defence of their mountains. 

The villages on either side of the hollow which 
we have crossed, form the district of Khépari ; 
with the exception of Lavdhari, they are prin- 
cipally inhabited by savage Musulman Albanians, 
of the Toshke tribe, the Christian houses not 
amounting to more than 230 in thirty villages. 
In these, though the ordinary language is Alba- 
nian, many of the men speak Greek, because the 
Papadhes are in general from Greece, and because 
many of the male inhabitants find that language 
necessary in their employment, as carriers, or 


VII. | MACEDONIA. 347 


keepers of flocks in the neighbouring parts of 
Greece. Like the Greeks of Asia Minor, and of 
other parts of Turkey where they are greatly in 
the minority, they seclude their women. The 
Wallachian language is partially used also in 
these mountains, being spoken by some remains 
of the Wallachian immigration which preceded 
the rise of the Albanian power ; and thus within a 
short distance the traveller may hear five tongues, 
Turkish, Albanian, Bulgarian, Wallachian, and 
Greek, all radically different, though from the: 
long mixture of the people they have many words 
in common. The Turkish is much the most rare. 
It is a melancholy reflection that all the Maho- 
metans of these mountains, and who now form 
the majority of the population, have become apos- 
tates from Christianity since the reign of Mahomet 
II., in which they have been imitated by many 
of Vlakhiote or Bulgarian race. 

My host the Papas complains of having to pay 
300 piastres a year in contributions. The great 
staff of life, maize, is produced in the Mizakia, of 
which the market is Berat. 

Sept. 12.—At 6.40 we leave Lavdhari, pursue 
the side of the mountain, and, in the neighbour- 
hood of two or three small villages, pass through 
several gardens, where the cornel’ and walnut are 
mixed with pear, apple, and some other fruit trees, 
which, being the growth of colder climates, are 
either not found or rarely found in Southern 
Greece and the-Moréa. Having then descended, 


1 ΄ 
Kpa Vlad. 


348 MACEDONIA. [CHAP. 


we cross at 7.45 a branch of the Khelidhéni, com- 
- ing from the south, and from thence ascend to 
Protopapas, which, notwithstanding its name, is 
‘now entirely Musulman, and has a mosque with a 
minaret, a distinction proper to be mentioned, as 
this picturesque adjunct of the mosque is by no 
means general in Albania. The road in many 
places is destroyed by the late rains, and in all 
parts is so extremely bad that our pace is very 
slow. The tediousness, however, is in great mea- 
sure compensated by the beauty and sablimity of 
the prospect. Though the sky still lowers, the 
weather is less threatening, and admits a view of 
the great summits at intervals. Occasionally they 
are illuminated by the sun, while fleecy vapours 
are seen settling on the ravines and vallies. Some- 
times we find ourselves in the midst of these va- 
pours unable to see more than a few feet before us, 
until suddenly the mist clearing away, shows the 
highest mountains in that partial manner which 
never fails to augment their apparent height and_ 
magnitude. Continuing to ascend over rugged | 
hills, we halt for 15 minutes at 10.45 at Dashari, 
situated under a woody peak called Bofnia, the 
continuation of the Khopari range: half an hour 
before Daushari we crossed a stream from the south, 
which unites with the Khelidhoni near its junction — 
with the Dev6l, of which the previous course was from 
the north-eastward, but which, after the junction, 
flows along the south-eastern side of Mount Leénia. 

At 12.45, after a continual ascent from Dashari, 
we arrive at the Kommeéno Lithari', or Cut Rock, 

* Κομμένον λιθάρι. 


VII. | MACEDONIA. 349 


in Albanian Guri Prei. This is a small rock rising 
from the crest of a ridge which ranges with Mount 
Lénia, and divides the hollow of the river Khelid- 
héni from that of another principal branch of the 
Dev6l, which flows along the eastern side of Mount 
Tomor. The ridge being exactly at this point lower 
and more accessible than in any other part, the 
‘Cut Rock” is the natural point of communication 
from the one valley to the other, and for that 
reason has been occupied by a castle which sur- 
rounds the rock, Komméno Lithari was taken 
from the Pasha of Berat, about seven years ago, by 
Aly, who now holds it with a garrison of a dozen 
dirty half-starved Albanians. The fort is nothing 
but a thin wall, surrounding a quadrangular space, 
in the centre of which rises a kula, or small keep, 
standing upon the lithari or rock itself: this tower 
was formerly the only fortress. The poor soldiers 
have a few chambers with fire-places in the tower, | 
but so dirty and miserable that I prefer remaining 
on the flat roof of the tower in the midst of fog, 
rain, and wind; doubly chilling after the late 
sultry weather in the plains. The soldiers com- 
plain of the cold in winter, when the snow lies on 
the ground for several months; but still more of 
the wind, which rushes through this lofty opening 
in the ridge, in concentrated blasts from whatever 
quarter it may come. Mutton they contrive to 
obtain occasionally, as even in winter some sheep 
remain in the sheltered vallies, and sometimes a 
little kalambokki, but neither wine nor spirits, their 
taim consisting only of koromana, or black bread: 
and having never yet received any pay, they must 


350 MACEDONIA. | CHAP. 


rob, starve, or desert, but for the contributions of 
passengers. 

After dining on the roof of the tower we quit 
Guri Prei at 8.15, and soon exchange its fogs and 
cold for the sunshine of a sheltered valley ; in de- 
scending to the bottom of which, we pass at 2.45 
through Dombréni, a Mahometan village with 
mosque and minaret, pleasantly situated among 
gardens and fields of maize, but bearing marks of 
the late war between the two vezirs in a ruined kula 
belonging to the Bey, who resides in the village. 
All this valley, with the including slopes from Guri 
Prei to the crest of Tomér, is called Tomoritza. 
From Dombréni there is a descent of another half 
hour to the branch of the Dev6l last-mentioned, 
which we cross at 3.15; then, after riding for a 
short distance along the bed, begin to ascend from 
its left bank the lower declivity of Mount Tomor. 
In the ascent, one of the horses, mounted by a 
postillion, falls to rise no more. Continuing 
through a very uneven and woody region, we 
arrive at length at the foot of the stupendous cliffs. 
and forests of the great summit, from which many 
fragments loosened by the rains have recently 
fallen into the road. At the end of two hours 
from the river we have made the tour of the 
northern end of the summit, and are beginning to 
proceed along its western face just under the high- 
est cliffs, which are entirely hid from view by the 
vapours. 

As we advance along the western side of the 
mountain, the sun becomes visible at short inter- 
vals, and lights up portions of the great plain of 

12 


Vil. | MACEDONIA. 961. 


the Mizakia with the sea beyond it, but these 
views are soon shut out again by interposing clouds 
and rain. Just as it becomes dark we obtain a sight 
of the village of Tomor or Domér in the highest 
habitable part of the mountain, and perceive on our 
right, at the extremity of the long rugged slope of 
the mountain, the Castle of Berat, and the valley 
of the river Uzimi. At 7 we arrive at the village, 
and as the rain is falling heavily, I am not sorry 
to obtain speedy admittance into a tower belong- 
ing to the family of a Papas recently deceased, who 
was the Proestés of Tomor. The village which is 
situated immediately under the immense cliffs, 
which surround the summit of the mountain, is 
built amidst a great number of walnut trees of 
native growth: in other parts of the mountain 
beeches and pines are the most common trees. 
The village is inhabited entirely by pastors of the 
Mizakia, who remain here during the months of 
June, July, August, and September, old style, and 
then return to their pastures and winter villages in 
the plain. Some of these persons possess several 
thousand head of cattle and sheep, from which 
butter and cheese are made, and labouring oxen 
reared for the supply of Rumili, Albania, and 
Greece. The butcher has scarcely any demand 
for the oxen, as beef is not much eaten by Turks 
or Christians either in these or any other parts of 
Turkey, and is seldom to be seen but in the Frank 
or Jewish houses of the great towns. The Illy- 
rian plains are subject to inundations, which some- 
times deprive the cattle of wholesome pasture 
in the spring, and generally cause a mortality, 


352 MACEDONIA. [ CHAP. 


as happened this year, and rendered necessary 
a large importation of beasts from the Ultra- 
Danubian provinces. The pastors of the Mizakia 
are chiefly of Vlakhiote descent, and speak both 
Wallachian and Albanian. A Bolu-bashi, ap- 
pointed by the Pasha of Berat, resides at Tomor, 
but has no power independent of the primates, the 
chief of whom, now present, is one Demetrius, who 
has a tolerable house as compared with the gene- 
rality of the miserable huts. He is one of the few 
persons in the community who can speak Greek, 
which he has learned by having travelled in the 
prosecution of his trade into several parts of Greece, 
particularly Acarnania and A%tolia, great feeding — 
countries. I find him a well-informed man for his 
station, and anxious to supply me with every thing . 
which the village can afford, nor can | prevail on 
him to accept payment for the provisions consumed 
by us. In truth, it is by no means uncommon to 
find not only more hospitality, but more informa- 
tion among the simple shepherds and husband- 
men of Greece, than among the inhabitants of the 
towns. 

Demetrius describes to me a Hellenic fortifica- 
tion on the summit of a height rising from a steep 
slope, which half an hour to the southward of the 
village of Tomér is surrounded at the back with 
precipitous cliffs, separating it from the upper 
heights of the mountain. 

Sept. 13.—The mountain of Kudhesi, to the 
south-eastward of Avlona, is conspicuous from 
Tomor, and to the left of it, more distant, is seen 
that of Dukai, Romaice Dukadhes, in Khimara. — 


VII. | MACEDONIA. 353 


At 7 a.m. we begin to descend the mountain to 
Berat. Its immense declivity is interrupted by 
very uneven ground and numerous ravines. 
Sometimes the road leads over sloping strata of 
bare limestone rock, rendered slippery by the 
rain, which still continues to fall, and in some 
places is so narrow and muddy that it could not 
be more difficult in the middle of winter. Several 
small villages appear on the right and left, chiefly 
Mahometan. Little cultivation is seen, but there 
are many large flocks of sheep and goats in the 
open pasture. In other parts the hills are covered 
with small trees, principally oaks, mixed with 
brushwood, consisting chiefly of pirnari, ilex, and 
lentisk. At 8.40, passing along the side of a pre- 
cipice where the narrow path has been rendered 
still narrower by the late rains, two of the loaded 
horses fall over, roll down for about fifty feet, and 
would have been precipitated to the bottom of the 
ravine, but for the trees and bushes which arrested 
their fall; neither baggage nor horses were hurt. 
This causes a delay until 9. 

At 11 we arrive in a narrow valley, where the 
river Uzami flows from the south, inclosed on the 
other side by a long mountain of no great height. 
Here the road turns to the westward with the 
castle of Berat in front, joins the loannina road at 
the river side, and follows the right bank. As we 
approach Berat the valley widens, and then again 
becomes narrow, until, at the Castle Hill, there is 
space only for the river between the precipices of 
that hill and the point of the opposite range. 

The Kassaba, or town, is divided into two parts 

VOL. I. Aa 


354 MACEDONIA. [ CHAP. 


by the gorge at the Castle Hill. Goritza, on the 
opposite side of the river, inhabited solely by 
Greeks, forms a third makhala; and the castle itself, 
which is occupied only by the Pasha’s palace and 
some houses of Christian Toshke, is a fourth. I 
enter the Kassaba at 12, and in half an hour more, 
in passing the castle gate, to the Greek quarter, 
observe in the wall adjacent to the outer and inner 
gates, particularly at the latter, some small re- 
mains of a massy Hellenic wall. After some diffi- 
culties, produced by the folly or roguery of the 
tatar, whom I discharge immediately, I obtain a 
lodging in the house of the principal Greek mer- 
chant, which by no means resembles the houses of 
the same class in Greece. Even in the best apart- 
ment there are neither glass windows, nor a ceil- 
ing, nor furniture to the divan, and the light ap- 
pears through the shutters, floor, and tiles. It is 
rather a bad omen to find three physicians residing 
here. ‘Two are Corfiotes, living wretchedly ; the 
third is Dr. G. Sakellarios, of Kézani, who was 
happily settled at Ambelakia, on Mount Ossa, 
when, at the request of Ibrahim, he was obliged 
by Aly to change his situation from a place which 
enjoys the comforts of civilized Europe more than 
any other in Greece, for the centre of Albanian 
barbarism. Dr. S. is well acquainted with Ger- 
man, Italian, French, Latin, and ancient Greek, 
has translated (in company with some others) the 
four first volumes of the Voyage d’Anacharsis into 
modern Greek, and has printed the first and 
fourth ; but has given up the work, lest suspicions 
should attach to him, because a part of the trans- 
10 


vil. | MACEDONIA. 350 


lation was made by Riga, and because the first 
volume was printed by another of the conspirators 
of Vienna, who were betrayed by the Austrian 
government to the Porte. Dr. §., anxious to 
benefit his countrymen, and sincerely attached to 
letters, is now engaged in translating into his 
native language the general history of Greece, by 
Cousin Despréaux, and is already advanced as far 
as the seventh volume. 

The character given of Ibrahim Pasha, even by 
those not attached to his service, is favourable. 
He is said to be a humane and lenient governor, 
and in many respects a favourable contrast to the 
Tepeleniote. He is desirous of peace, but his two 
enterprizing neighbours will not permit him, par- 
ticularly Aly, who will probably be satisfied with 
nothing short of his destruction. Ibrahim, how- 
ever, is himself an usurper: he was son-in-law of 
his predecessor Ismail, at whose death he seized 
the castle, battered the palace, where Mehmét 
Pasha, the son of ismail, had taken refuge, and 
drove him out. Mehmét is now living in poverty 
at Lasnia. Ibrahim has lately finished, or rather 
has not quite finished, a lofty building at one 
corner of the castle, consisting of three or four 
stories, to which a palace in the usual Turkish 
taste is attached. Here he constantly resides, 
scarcely ever moving from his divan but once in 
two or three months to some neighbouring village, 
and very seldom entering even his harém, unless 
it be that part where his treasures are deposited : 
he has only one wife, the mother of a son, who, 
though only six or eight years old, is already 

Aa2 


356 MACEDONIA. [CHAP. 


styled pasha, and has an establishment of offi- 
cers. 
Sept. 14.—This forenoon I visit His Highness, 
for being a vezir he is styled by the Greeks ὑψηλό- 
rnc, like Aly. Nothing is here to be seen of the 
crowd, and noise, and multitude of dirty Albanian 
soldiers, which give such an air of business or con- 
fusion to the palace of Aly Pasha; only a few 
tatars, or other persons silently seated, in attend- 
ance in some long passages which lead to the 
Pasha’s apartments. After passing through an 
anti-chamber, in which several handsome youths 
with pallid countenances are reading the Koran 
aloud, I find the Pasha stretched out at full length 
in one corner of his sofa in a small apartment, 
neat, but quite deficient in the magnificence which 
is often overdone in Aly’s palaces. The latter, on 
a first visit, is generally found walking about the 
room; after a few words of salutation, he imme- 
diately asks his guest to be seated, more polite in 
this than Russians in authority, whose interviews 
with persons of inferior rank are on foot. Aly 
seems to have adopted his method as a compro- 
mise between the ordinary European custom and 
that of the Turks on these occasions. But Ibrahim 
has made no such advances in civilization: he 
does not move from his posture when I enter, but 
merely makes a motion for me to be seated. No 
pipes or coffee are handed: he speaks very little, 
and shows nothing of the curiosity, shrewdness, 
or engaging manners of his brother of Ioannina, 
as the latter styled him in the letter of introduc- 
tion which I brought. In manner and conversa- 


VI. | MACEDONIA. 357 


tion, however, he is neither rude nor haughty. 
He invites me to visit any part of his territories I 
may wish, and has no recollection of having seen 
an English traveller here before, though captains 
of English ships have not unfrequently visited him, 
both here and at Avlona; and not long since, on 
the occasion of a shipwreck near Apollonia, he 
clothed and fed a part of the crew and sent them 
to Constantinople. Some attempts to raise the 
ship are now in progress. 

The dominions of this Vezir extend to a distance 
only of four hours to the south, having been re- 
duced to that limit by Aly Pasha, who had before 
conquered the country as far as Paleéd Pogéghiani 
inclusive, from Kurt Pasha, the predecessor of 
Ismail. To the north Ibrahim commands as far 
as Lisnia, distant six hours on the road to Duras. 
He has lately acquired the district of Elbassan, 
and in that direction his dominion extends farthest 
into the mountains. Tyrana and Kavaya are an 
appanage of the Sultan Mother, and are his boun- 
daries in the maritime plains. At Lesh, inclusive, 
begins the government of the Vezir of Skéodra. 
Ibrahim’s brother was Pasha of Avléna; since his 
death the government has been filled up with 
Ibrahim’s name in the yearly nomination of the 
Porte; and last year that of his young son Suli- 
man was inserted, the Porte having been willing to 
augment his power as a counterpoise to that of Aly. 

The Beratinés', to use the familiar Greek ex- 
pression, is at present greatly in want of money, 


* ὁ Beparuvoc. 


908 MACEDONIA. [ CHAP. 


and, having gained his ends at Elbassan, has been 
glad to put an end to the war with him of Skdodra’. 
Ibrahim’s necessities obliged him last year to op- 
press some of the villages, but he was checked by 
the Turkish beys of Berat, who own many of them, 
and whom he has not mastered so completely as 
has been done at Ioannina by Aly. He possesses 
a considerable landed property, having, when he 
succeeded to the Pashalik, purchased the malik- 
hiané, or farm, for life, of all the Beyliks, which 
had been held by Ismail Pasha. As the annual 
payment to the Porte was calculated by the rela- 
tive value of corn and money, when he obtained 
the grant, he has been a great gainer by the de- 
basement of the Turkish coinage; and although 
the Porte will probably make a demand upon him 
in consequence; such demands are not very quickly 
complied with in Albania, when the persons upon 
whom they are made have the means of avoiding 
them. 

Corn-lands in the adjacent plains generally pay 
half the produce to the owner: farther north, in 
the proportion of three to the cultivator and two 
to the owner; but in the latter case the farmer 
bears a greater share of the expences. Corn is 
measured here by the Bara of eight Kiasé, each 
of which is 100 Airpac, or Greek pounds, which 
are the same as Venetian. The crop of the rice 
grounds, watered by the river in the plain of 
Berat, is divided into three parts; one of which 
goes to the Pasha for miri, and the expence of 


1 


ὁ Σκόδρας. 


vu. | MACEDONIA. 359 


keeping the channels in order, the other two to 
the owner and the cultivator. Wheat in the plain 
of Berat and in the Mizakia is sown at two seasons, 
October or November, and February. The latter 
bears a small hard grain, and makes excellent 
flour: it is called Kutzéli. Barley is also sown in 
February. The last harvest was very bad from 
the same cause which produced mortality among 
the cattle,—the excess of rain during the winter 
and spring. Flax is sown at the present season. 
Kalambokki (which is chiefly arabositi or maize): 
in May: it is not watered, except near the river 
or near the canals' derived from it. No Christian 
has any landed property in the Mizakia, but the 
pastures are open to the public on paying a mode. 
rate κεφαλιάτικο, or tax on each head of cattle. 

Berat, in vulgar Greek τὸ Μπεράτι, is named by 
the writers of the Lower Empire Βελάγριτα, or Βελέ- 
γραδα, which latter is still the title of the bishop- 
ric. It is nothing more than the Greek form 
of the same Sclavonic word, Beligrad (white for- 
tress), of which Berat is the Albanian corruption. 
The name shows that the place was a part of the 
Bulgarian conquests, and long in possession of 
that people. 

The castle is defended by a strong battlement in 
the Turkish style, raised on a wall which is flanked 
by square towers, but armed with only two or three 
small pieces of ordnance. The greater part of the 
inclosed space slopes in such a manner as to be 
entirely exposed to another height now covered 
with vineyards to the north-east, where the Pasha 


/ 
1 αὐλάκια. 


360 MACEDONIA. [CHAP. 


has lately constructed a small square castle. At 
the foot of this hill is the principal Turkish quar- 
ter, which extends from thence up to the cliffs of 
the castle-hill, and is pervaded by a long bazar 
from one end to the other. The extremity near 
the castle is the only part of it imhabited by 
Greeks. In Goritza, or the quarter on the left 
bank of the river, there are about sixty houses, 
which, added to those in the castle, make the 
Christian families amount altogether to four hun- 
dred. In the Kassaba there are about six hundred 
Mahometan houses. Just below Goritza the river 
is crossed by a handsome bridge which was built 
by Kurt Pasha. From the left bank of the river 
rises a long and lofty ridge named Spiragri’, 
beautifully clothed with wood on the slope. At 
the foot of it stands a palace which was built by 
Ismail Pasha, and which, having been much in- 
jured by the shot from the castle in the war which 
followed that Pasha’s death, has since been neg- 
lected. Below Berat the Uzimi winds to the 
N.N.W. through a valley called Topalti, which 
expands to a breadth of three miles between the 
parallel ranges of Tomor and Spiragr, and at the 
end of eight or nine miles opens into the great 
maritime plains or champaign country which an- 
ciently belonged to Bullis, Apollonia, Dimallum, 
Dyrrachium, and some other cities of minor note. 
The Uzimi, soon after entering the plain, makes 


' The final i in this name, nians in their pronunciation 
as in Berati and many others, omitting it. 
is the Greek form: the Alba- 


VII. | MACEDONIA. 361 


a turn to the left, and then receives the Devdl, 
not far from the place where the latter emerges 
out of a narrow gorge in the mountains to the 
eastward. 

The castle of Berat, although a lofty point, is 
situated too far in the valley to command an ex- 
tensive view: the sea is not visible. To the north 
the mountains near Krdéia and Tyrana are pointed 
out to me; and in the opposite direction in a line 
with the Uzumi, the hills near Skrepari and Dis- 
nitza, above which rises the great serrated crest of 
Nemértzika. The range of Tomor shuts out all 
view to the eastward, and the parallel range almost 
equally in the opposite direction. 

The Hellenic remains in the castle wall, and 
their situation on a precipitous height overhanging 
the river, at the entrance of a valley leading from 
the plains of Illyria into the strongest parts of 
Epirus, afford indubitable proofs that Berat stands 
on the site of an ancient city of some importance. 
But there is no evidence in history sufficiently 
precise to afford any certainty as to its name. 
The probabilities are in favour of Antipatria, 
which was certainly hereabout, and is described 
by the historian as a great city strongly fortified, 
and situated in a narrow pass’. It was taken in the 
year B.C. 200, by L. Apustius, who was detached 
by the consul Sulpicius from his camp in the neigh- 
bouring plain, with directions to lay waste the Mace- 
donian frontier. In strictness, indeed, this country 
was a part, not of Macedonia, but of Atintania, 


S bave-bie3 1,018. 


362 MACEDONIA. | CHAP. VII. 


Dassaretia, or Illyria; but nothing is more likely 
than that the kings of Macedonia had added it 
to their dominions when their power was at its 
height, in the ages preceding the Roman wars, 
and when a new name may have been given to 
this place in honour of Antipater. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


ILLYRIA, EPIRUS. 


From Berat to Apollonia—Plain of Topalti—Vakopoli—Dona- 
fros—Liari—Stafiri—River Iénitza—Radostin—Monastery 
of Pollina—Poghiani—A pollonia—Amantia, Byllis, Oricum 
—Rivers dous, Celydnus, and Polyanthes— Nympheum— 
Return to Berat—and to loannina—River Uzimi—Totjer— 
Venakés—Mount Trebusin—Klistra—Aor Stena—Defeat of 
Philip by T. Quinctius— Mounts Mropus and Asnaus — 
Premedi — Zagoria, Kieperia, Eletisa —'Tjersova— Mount 
Nemértzika — Ostanitza — Pyrrhi Castra, and retreat of 
Philip thither—Konitza— Rivers Viosa and Voidhomati— 
Mavrovuni— Pogoghiani— Ravéni— Retreat of Philip from 
Pyrrhi Castra to Mount Lingon—Sources of the river Ka- 
lama—Kalbaki—Lykéstomo—TIoannina. 





Sept. 21.—The route from Berat to Avléna after 
descending into the plain follows the course of the 
Beratiné, or Uzimi, at a small distance from the 
river, and sometimes passes along the bank itself. 
The road is wide and rendered very dusty by cars, 
which we meet, drawn by buffalos. These beasts 
are entirely covered with dried mud, a conse- 
quence of the habit which they have in the sum- 
mer, of rolling or immerging themselves up to 
their necks, and even to their nostrils, in the mud 
and shallow water of the rivers, lakes, or ponds. 
There they remain enjoying the coolness, free 
from the torment of insects, many hours at a time, 


364 ILLYRIA. [CHAP. 


and when they emerge, obtain in the dried mud 
an armour against the flies. The carts are loaded 
with wood, hay, and other commodities for the 
use of the town. The wheels have spokes and 
very broad fellies, narrowed at the edge, but are 
so loosely and clumsily fixed to the axle as to 
sway about at every step with an incessant creak- 
ing. At the end of 1 hour and 50 minutes we 
cross the river at 5 p.m. by a handsome bridge, 
which was built by Kurt Pasha. Near it we meet 
the metropolitan bishop of Velégrada, or Berat, 
coming into town from his residence at Kolk6n- 
dasi, and accompanied by two priests with yata- 
ghans in their girdles and pistols in their holsters. 
The bishop’s house in the castle of Berat is occu- 
pied by the Pasha’s Grammatikés, a Greek who 
manages all the money concerns of the lazy Ibra- 
him, making good use of the favour he enjoys for 
his own advantage, and affecting such pride in 
his official station as to be above visiting the 
Pasha’s physician, the learned Sakellario. _ Half 
an hour beyond the bridge the road ascends the 
hills which bound the plain of Topalti on the west, 
and at 6 we arrive at Vakopoli, a village of 25 
Greek houses in a retired situation among the 
hills, surrounded with gardens, and an extensive 
tract of vineyards. There are two papadhes in | 
the village, with one of whom I lodge in a ruinous 
cottage, but the best in the place. He informs 
me that at Pakhtds, a village among the hills, an 
hour and a half to the left of Liari, which is on 
the road from hence to Avlona, there is a fountain 
of ἄσφαλτον, which rises like water out of the 


VIII. | ILLYRIA. 365 


ground. Strabo describes a fountain of warm 
water mixed with asphaltum at the Nympheum 
of Apollonia', where a bituminous substance was 
extracted also in a solid form. But the latter mine, 
which is still wrought, is atSelenitza, near the Vidsa, 
much nearer to Aulon and Apollonia. The foun- 
tain of pitch at Pakhtés, therefore, is different from 
that of Strabo, and shows the great extent of the 
subterraneous riches of this quarter of Greece. 
The same papas describes a place near a village 
called Ekali, where are two Palea Kastra, one on 
a peak above the other, and the latter immediately 
above the river Vidsa, or Vuisa, as he pronounces 
the name ; they are in a hilly district on the right 
bank of that river, not far from its entrance into 
the plains. He measured one of the stones in the 
castle wall, and found it 14 σπιθαμαὶς, or spans 
long, and 4 high. Here also, he adds, is a great 
rock, inscribed with Φραγκικὰ γράμματα, or Frank 
words, which nobody can read; perhaps they are 
Latin, though 1 have often heard the same de- 
scription given to Hellenic inscriptions by half 
educated Greeks. The ruins are the same as 
those which were described to me at Tepeléni?. 
There is a small village on the site named Gra- 
dista, a Slavonic name analogous to the Greek 
Kastri. The two castles probably belonged to the 
same Greek city, the upper having been the 
Acropolis. Ekali is reckoned 7 hours from Vako- 


* Strabo, p. 316. by the Latin inscription which 
* They are the ruins of Bul- he found. 
lis, as Dr. Holland has proved 


366 ILLYRIA. [CHAP. 


poli, 6 from Avléna, and 5 from Apolloma; but 
being inhabited by wild Toskidhes, not in the 
government of Ibrahim nor controlled by Aly, 
whose authority does not extend along the Viodsa, 
below Lidpesi, it will, I fear, be inaccessible to 
me. The Greeks of Vakopdli, in common with 
those of all the villages which lie on the great 
routes, suffer extremely from the Albanian soldiers 
who quarter upon them. 

Sept. 22.—At 7 this morning we begin to cross 
a ridge which separates Vakopoli from a southerly 
branch of the great plain of Mizakié, by the 
Greeks called Mizakia, or Mizakia. At 8.30 we 
arrive at Donafrdés, a small Musulman village with 
a mosque, situated in a retired valley among 
heights, which are the last falls of Spiragri, and 
the hills of Duasnitza. This is the frontier of 
Mizakia and Malakastra, which last district begins 
from the western side of the plain of Topalti, and, 
skirting the roots of these hills, extends to near 
Avlona. Leaving Donatrés, we have a large 
opening of the plain of Mizakia on the right, and 
one hour and a half distant in that direction, the 
large village of Dronovitza, inhabited by a mixed 
population of Mahometans and Christians. At 
9.30 Kervél is on our left, a scattered village 
occupying two summits, between which is a cul- 
tivated hollow. One of the summits is crowned 
with a church, the other with a mosque. At 
10.20, crossing an extremity of one of the heights, 
we pass through the skirts of Liari, a small vil- 
lage ; the hills towards Pakhtos are chalky or 
gypsous. At Luari, one of my servants being 


VIII. | ILLYRIA. 367 


seized with a violent fit of the intermittent fever, 
we are obliged to remain at a khan, a quarter of 
an hour beyond the village, till4 p.m. We then 
cross a large branch of the plain, to the projection 
of a low root of the mountain which bounds it to 
the westward, and having turned the extremity, 
arrive at 5.35 at Stafiri, where a large church 
and a bazar show that it is a Christian village of 
relative importance, though the houses are mere 
huts of wicker and mud, without chimneys, and 
the bazar a row of miserable shops. The cultiva- 
tion of this noble plain, capable of supplying grain 
to all Illyria and Epirus, with an abundance of 
other productions, is confined to a few patches of 
maize near the villages. Nevertheless the Miza- 
kia is as well peopled as most of the great plains, 
either of Asiatic or European Turkey, and better 
than many-of them. This part of it is well wooded ; 
the hedges and great trees are festooned with wild 
vines, which produce a small grape of excellent 
flavour: and the villages in general are embosomed 
in clusters of trees, the huts standing far apart, 
each with its piece of garden ground. At Stafiri 
we cross a stone bridge over a lazy rivulet, named 
Jénitza, flowing from the heights on our left towards 
the Apsus, and here inclosed between high banks. 

At 6.50, after having traversed another bay of 
the plain to another point of the hills, we arrive at 
the large scattered Turkish village of Radostin, 
agreeably situated at the foot of low woody hills 
above a grove of fine oaks. Some of the inhabit- 
ants show an inclination to insult us as we pass, 
until they espy a negro tatar, a favourite ser- 


368 ILLYRIA. | CHAP. 


vant of the Vezir Ibrahim, who accompanies me, 
and who is well known throughout his dominions. 
The burying-ground of Radostin is full of pieces of 
fluted columns, and other fragments of the good 
times of antiquity. Having crossed a height be- 
yond it, and descended a little of its westerii slope, 
we arrive at a quarter past 7 at a monastery, of 
which I take the correct name to be ἡ παναγία τῆς 
᾿Απολλωνίας, as Standing upon a part of the site of 
Apollonia, but which the ignorant monks have 
been pleased to convert into the ridiculous title of 
ἢ παναγία τοῦ ᾿Απόλλωνος : the vulgar name of the 
place is Péllina, or Péllona. A small village named 
Poyani' lies at the foot of the hill to the north; and 
nearer to the monastery, in the opposite direction, 
a few labourers’ huts called ra Καλύβια, in a narrow 
vale lying between the hill of the monastery and 
a parallel low ridge, clothed with small beeches. 
Behind the monastery, towards the summit of the 
hill, are some gardens and vineyards in a ruined 
and neglected state, (like the greater part of the 
extensive lands of the monastery,) the cause of 
which is the exposed situation of the place on a 
route much frequented by the Albanian soldiery, 
and so convenient as a halting place that parties of 
them often remain here for two or three days for 
the sake of the free quarters, and in the course of 
these unwelcome visits have ruined all the cells 
and other apartments of the building. The best 
lodging I can find is the cell of the Igumenos, a 
little chamber perfectly Albanian as to dirtiness, 


* Πωγιαγή. 


Vil. | ILLYRIA. 369 


and of which the thick stone walls are gaping open 
at one corner. Only two monks now reside here. 
The church has been built and repaired at different 
periods, but is chiefly composed of Roman tiles, 
and of ancient squared stones of a large size taken 
from the ruins of Apollonia; some of these have 
been carved into monstrous ornaments of the lower 
ages. There remain the sepulchral monuments 
of two Ἡγούμενοι of the ninth century. The mo- 
nastery contains some fine pieces of sculpture, 
which having been found, for the most part, in 
ploughing the fields on the ancient site, have been 
fixed into the walls in the room of other stones dis- 
placed for their reception. It is to this custom of 
adorning their convents and churches, which still 
generally prevails among the Greeks, that we are 
indebted for the preservation of the greater part 
of existing inscriptions and remains of art. Of 
those in the walls of the monastery of Apollonia 
the most remarkable are as follows:—1. The bust 
of a matron with the veil thrown over the hair, 
and then passing under the breast. This bust the 
monks say was quite perfect, until some soldiers 
of Berat thought proper to amuse themselves by 
firing their musquets at it, which has destroyed 
the nose and chin. 2. The bust of a young man, 
with curled hair, and a short thick beard covering 
all the lower part of his face; the breast and right 
shoulder are bare, and a loose garment hangs over 
the left shoulder and under the breast. Both these 
busts are of the human size, and of white marble, 
apparently Italian. The nose of this last bust was 
destroyed by the plough when it was discovered. 
VOL. I. ΒΡ 


370 ILLYRIA. | CHAP. 


3. A small mnema or monumental stone, repre- 
senting in relief two young persons in loose garments 
with the right hands joined, and the left hand of the 
female upon the left shoulder of the man. The 
face of the man is perfect, that of the female is 
destroyed. Her name was Prima, as appears by 
the letters TIPIMAXAIPE over her head. 4. A 
very spirited Paniscus or Satyr seated on a rock, 
with his goat’s legs crossed, grinning and blowing 
on the pan-pipe, which he holds with both hands. 
5. A fragment of a frize, representing the lower 
part of the drapery, and part of the wing of a 
female figure flying, together with a man’s front 
face upon a shield; around the face are locks of 
hair, twisted upon the forehead. 6. Another similar 
fragment representing in low relief a man setting 
one foot on the hip of a woman, and dragging her 
by her arms, which are passed over her head. 
Behind him is a warrior with a shield and flying 
robe, in the attitude of combat: the very common 
subject probably of the Greeks* and Amazons. 
Underneath the figures is an lonic border, which 
is continued round one of the other sides of the 
stone: there are some other figures hid in the wall. 
This fragment and the preceding appear to have 
been parts of the frize of the same building. 7. A 
sepulchral stone, with a man on horseback: very 
good. 8. Another mnema, bearing the figure of 
a bearded old man with a long staff in one hand ; 
below is the head of a greyhound looking up at the 
man. This is roughly wrought, but in good de- 
sion. 9. A dog seizing an ass, both animals. on 
full stretch: an Ionic border below shows that it 
12 


VI. | ILLYRIA. 371 


was part of a frize. 10. Another piece of frize too 
high in the wall to be seen; it seems to be a man 
on horseback opposed to a lion, while behind him 
another wild beast seizes an ox. 11. Two front 
faces with locks of hair hanging down on either 
side; part of a frize. 12. The head of a lion, 
which anciently served for a spout. 

There are only three inscriptions, and all merely 
sepulchral, but curious as all containing Roman 
names, and thus according with the known fact of 
Apollonia having been much resorted to by the 
Romans, who sent hither their youth to study the 
literature and philosophy of Greece. . Augustus 
had thus passed six months when the death of 
Cesar called him to Rome’. One of the inscrip- 
tions is in memory of Lucius Licinius Tere (ntius), 
who died at the age of 65’; another was in honour 
of Titus Julius Clemens, who died at 45, and 
whose wife’s name, Claudia Therine, was only half 
Roman*. The third is the monument in honour 
of Prima. 

It was at the end of the seventh century before 
the Christian cra, that this fertile part of Illyria 
first received the laws and customs of Greece. 
Dyrrhachium and Apollonia were then colonized 
by the Corcyrei, who, according to ancient cus- 
tom, placed at the head of each colony a leader 
from Corinth, as being the metropolis of Corcyra 
itself. The northern colony was named Epidam- 


1 Sueton. in August. c. 8, * Inscription No. 4. 
10, &e. Dion. Cass. 1. 45, ὁ Inscription No. 5. 
esd. ‘Patera. 2, Ὁ. 59. 

Bb 2 


372 ILLYRIA. [CIIAP. 


nus, the southern Gylacia, from Gylax, the Co- 
rinthian leader, but neither appellation continued 
long in use, those of Dyrrhachium and Apollonia 
having prevailed’. Apollonia is described by the 
ancient authors as situated at a distance of ten 
stades from the right bank of the Aous?, fifty® or 
sixty* stades, or four miles*, from the sea, two 
days’ journey to the south of Dyrrhachium‘, 
twenty-five Roman miles from Aulon’, and three 
hundred and twenty stades*, or thirty Roman 
miles®, from Amantia. There are some traces of 
walls close to the monastery on the north, extend- 
ing from thence upwards to the summit of the hill, 
and along that summit in a northerly direction. 
Below the monastery they followed the crest of the 
ridge to the plain, where their traces are lost. 
There is also part of a transverse wall which, a little 
below the monastery, branches from the main wall 
to the northward. To the southward of the hill of the 
monastery are the remains of two temples, one in 
the valley at the Kalyvia, the other beyond that 
valley, at the extremity of the heights which rise 
from that side of it. The former temple appears 
from some fragments to have been Ionic. The 


* Thucyd. 1. 1, c. 24, 26. ° Scylax in Ἰλλύριοι. 
Scymn. Ch. v. 485, 488. “ Strabo, ibid. 
Strabo, p. 8516: Pim. ΠΝ; * Plin. H.N. Πδ 7. 23: 
1. 3, c. 26. Euseb. Chron. δ Scylax, ibid. 
U. C. 120. Pausan. Eliac. 7 Antonin. Itin. p. 329. 
pr. c. 22. Stephan. ἴῃ ᾽Απολ- Wessel. 
Awvia, Δυῤῥάχιον, Γυλακία. δ Scylax, ibid. 
? Strabo, ibid. Ptolem. 1. 3, ° Tab. Peutinger, seg. 5. 
ο. 18. 


VILL. | ILLYRIA. 373 


low situation and deep loam of this valley seemed 
to promise, that some considerable remains of the 
temple might still be concealed below the surface; 
but on inquiring of the monks, I was informed that 
no less than seventy cart loads of materials had 
been taken from thence to build the new serai at 
Berat. Similar spoliations have been committed 
at the western temple, and so recently that the 
excavation made to carry away the foundations, 
of which not a single stone is left, affords a very 
tolerable measurement of the length and breadth 
of the building. One column standing in solitary 
grandeur is the only part of it which has been spared 
by the Pasha’s masons. The length of the temple 
was about 135 feet, the breadth 55; the column, 
which has 20 Doric flutings, with a capital more 
spreading than in the Parthenon, and probably 
more ancient, is 14 feet in circumference at its 
base, and consequently 44 feet in diameter, which, 
compared with the dimensions of the ground plan, 
and supposing an intercolumniation of 5+ feet, 
would lead to the belief that the temple was a 
hexastyle with 14 columns on the side. The extant 
column is composed of 12 pieces of stone, and the 
height is about 22 feet, including the capital and 
plinth, which are of a single stone, and together 
about 2 feet 9 inches high. The material is a dull 
white limestone, hard, but nevertheless much in- 
jured by time and the effect of the sea air. At 
Kalyvia there is a fountain, perhaps the ancient 
Cephissus which was near the gymnasium'. These 


* Strabo, p. 424. 


374 ILLYRIA. [CHAP. 


are the only vestiges I can find of the great Apol- 
lonia. The existing line of walls meeting i an 
angle at the summit of the hill behind the monas- 
tery, and diverging from thence to the north, tends 
to show that the city faced the north-west, and that 
the two temples and gymnasium were without the 
walls, which would have been very far from a 
singularity. It is possible, at the same time, that 
the present remains of walls may not be of Hellenic 
times, as there are no certain marks of such anti- 
quity in them. If the woody height to the south- 
ward were explored, some other vestiges might 
perhaps be found, which would give a clue to the 
dimensions and general plan of the city. 

The hill of Apollonia is not of sufficient height 
to command a very extensive prospect, or to afford 
a very advantageous geographical station, though 
by no means useless in this respect. To the south- 
westward is seen the island of Sazona, twenty 
degrees to the right of the northern end of which is 
the mouth of the Vidsa, and seventy-two farther 
to the right that of the river of Berat, forming a 
long promontory. The farthest part of the shore 
to the north is the hill of Kavaya, appearing as an 
island. A little to the left of Sazona is seen Cape 
Glossa, or the Acrocerauman extremity, between 
which and the island is the southern entrance into 
the Gulf of Avléna. That town is not visible, 
being hidden by some heights on the eastern side 
of the lagoon, which extends along the shore at 
the northern entrance of the gulf. To the left of 
Glossa occurs the Acroceraunian ridge, separated 
by the valley of Nivitza from the range of Griva, 


VIII. | ILLYRIA. 375 


which bounds the valley of the Vidsa to the west- 
ward. At the northern extremity of this range is 
the district of Kadhesi, containing twenty villages 
and a lofty summit, forming a conspicuous termi- 
nation to the range of Griva. To the left of the 
mountain of Kadhesi appears that of Skrepari, to 
the south-east of Mount Tomor, then the gigantic 
Tomor itself, occupying eight degrees of the hori- 
zon. The hill of Spiragr, which bounds the plain 
of Berat, extends several degrees to the northward 
of Mount Tomor, and in the midst of the plain 
watered by the Apsus, or river of Berat, is seen 
the height of Ardhenitza, so called from a monas- 
tery on the summit. 

The valleys of Dukadhes and Nivitza formed 
anciently the territory of the Amantini, or Aman- 
tienses, or Amantes', the last of which forms was 
preferred by the people, and was employed by 
them on their money, in memory of their origin 
from the Abantes of Eubcea, who settled near the 
Ceraunian mountains after the war of Troy, and 
possessed Oricus and Thronium*. That the dis- 
trict of Amantia lay in that direction from Apol- 
lonia and Oricus is confirmed by Cesar*, while 
the distances afforded by Scylax and the Tabular 
Itinerary‘, added to the evidence of Hellenic walls 


1 ᾽Αμαντῖνοι, ᾿Αμαντιεῖς, ° Cesar de Bell. Civ. 1. 3, 
"ApParrec. c. 40. 
᾿ . . καὶ ᾿Αμαντίνην * Scylax in Ἰλλύριοι. Tab. 


ᾧκεσαν ‘Qouiny.—Callim. ap. Peutinger, seg. v. The former 
Stephan. ἴῃ ᾿Αβάντις. Pausan. places Amantia at 320 stades, 
Eliac. pr. c. 22, Stephan. in the latter at 30 Roman miles 
᾿Αβάντις, ᾿Αμαντία, Etym. from Apollonia. 

Mag. in "Apayrec. 


376 ILLYRIA. [CHAP. 


at Nivitza, show that place to have been the site 
of the town of Amantia. The only objection which 
can be made to this conclusion is, that according 
to Ptolemy both Bullis and Amantia were on the 
sea-coast between Aulon and the mouth of the 
Celydnus’, in which he seems to agree with Cesar, 
who just before he quitted this quarter for the siege 
of Dyrrhachium, left a detachment of his fleet under 
Leelius to prevent supplies from being thrown into 
Oricus from Amantia and Bullis. The only mode 
of reconciling the apparent inconsistency is to sup- 
pose that Amantia, Bullis, and Apollonia, possess- 
ing all the country adjacent to the Gulf of Aulon, 
and being all situated at some distance from the 
coast, had each of them a port or maritime de- 
pendency on the gulf. It was probably to these 
maritime places that Ptolemy alluded, and towards 
them that the vigilance of Lelius was chiefly di- 
rected, in order to intercept supplies intended for 
Oricus. 

The branch of the Aous, which irrigated the 
valley of Amantia, would seem from Lycophron to 
have been named Polyanthes*. As to Thronium, 


* Ptolem, 1. 3,2e.13; 
᾿ εἰς ᾿Αβαντίαν πόλιν 
Πλώσει, πέλας δὲ γῆς ᾿Ατιντάνων μόλων, 
Πράκτιν παῤ αὐτὴν αἰπὺ νάσσεται λέπας, 
Τοῦ Χαονίτου νᾶμα Πολυάνθους δρέπων. 
Lycoph. v. 1048. 

The poet supposes Elephe- brought a colony first to Othro- 
nor the ἄρχος ᾿Αβάντων, who, nus (Fanfi), and afterwards to 
according to Homer, was slain have founded Amantia. 
by Agenor at Troy, to have 


VIII. | ILLYRIA. 377 


it appears to have stood at the northern extremity 
of the Amantine territory, on the borders of that 
of Apollonia, for it was reduced by the Apolloniatz 
and added to their district in an early age, as 
appears by an epigram annexed to a groupe of sta- 
tuary at Olympia, which the Apolloniate had 
dedicated on that occasion from the tenth of the 
spoil’. 

It is remarkable that the Roman road from 
Apollonia to Nicopolis by Hadrianopolis, in the 
valley of Arghyrokastro, ascended the Amantine 
valley, and not that of the Aous, although the latter 
is at least as direct, and there was a continuity of 
plain or valley from Apollonia to Hadrianopolis 
without any intervening mountain; whereas, on 
the former route, some high ridges are interposed 
between the head of the valley of Amantia and the 
plain of Hadrianopolis. Possibly there were some 
rocky projections on the banks of the Aous, which 
it would have required great labour to render 
passable, or frequent ferries or bridges, which it 
was desirable to avoid’. 

Selenitza, where the mines of pitch mentioned 
by Strabo are found, is about four hours to the 


* Μναματ᾽ ᾿Απολλωνίας ἀνακείμεθα τὰν ἐπὶ πόντῳ 
"Ὥικισεν ᾿Ιωνίῳ Φοῖβος ἀκερσεκόμας, 
Οἱ γᾶς τέρμαθ᾽ ἑλόντες ᾿Αβαντίδος, ἐνθάδε ταῦτα 
"Eoracay σὺν τοῖς ἐκ Θρονίου δεκάταν. 
Ap. Pausan. Eliac. pr. c. 22. 


* It would seem, however, the colony of Bullis to some 
fromthe inscription of Gradista, other place. But this inscrip- 
before referred to, that there tion is long anterior to the 
was a Roman road in the val- _ Itineraries. 
ley of the Aous, leading from 


378 ILLYRIA. [ CHAP. 


north-eastward of Avléna, near the left bank of 
the Vidsa, not far above the junction of the river 
of Nivitza, and a little below Gradista, which is on 
the opposite side of the river. The asphaltum is 
dug out of the earth in large masses, mixed 
with a considerable quantity of earth. Ibrahim 
Pasha farms the mine from the Porte, and is 
said to receive from those to whom he underlets 
it 120,000 piastres a year. It is a hard black 
resin’, and when mixed with vegetable pitch is 
much used in the Adriatic in the careening of 
boats. Strabo, or rather Posidonius, whom he 
cites, had an idea that earth thrown into the mine 
was converted into pitch: the fact, perhaps, 18, 
that the asphaltum, liquified by subterraneous heat, 
flows in that state into the cavities of the earth, 
whether natural or formed by the excavations from 
which asphaltum had been already extracted, and 
that it there hardens, whence the mineral may ap- 
pear to be continually renewed in the same cavity. 
Near the mine a gaseous effluvia on the surface of 
the ground sometimes takes fire, and maintains a 
flame for several days. This is evidently the cele- 


* The familiar allusion to mention by Strabo, that the 
this substance by Ovid, shows mine was extensively worked 
still more strongly than its under the Romans: 


Nominibus mollire licet mala ; fusca vocetur 
Nigrior Illyricaé cui pice sanguis erit. 
Art. Am. 1. 2, v. 657. 


Adde quod Illyrica si jam pice nigrior essem, 
Non mordenda mihi turba fidelis erat. 
Epist. ex Ponto, 1. 4, Ep. 14. v. 45. 


VIII. | ILLYRIA. 379 


brated Nympheum of Apollonia', which is re- 
corded on the coins of that city by the type of 
three nymphs dancing round a flame’. 

Sept. 27, 28, 29, 30.—Instead of exploring 
Illyria and Chaonia any farther, I was obliged to 
employ these four days in returning to Berat, in 
consequence of a violent fever which assumed an 
intermittent form. Being unable to sit upon a 
horse for more than half an hour at a time, | was 
under the necessity of performing the greater part 
of the journey in the arabas of the Mizakia. The 
first day I halted at Kalkondasi, and lodged in 
the house of the Bishop of Velégrada (Berat). 
In the walls of the church are several fragments 
(brought probably from Apollonia) of sculptures 
in low relief, and of architectural ornaments, 
and there is a tomb-stone with an inscription of 
lower times, but not Christian. The next day I 
crossed over the hill of Ardhenitza, which stands 
in the middle of the Mizakia, and in a great monas- 
tery on the summit found the Bishop, whose house 


* The mines and Nympheum 
were visited in 1813 by Dr. 
Holland, who descended into 
the mine. He remarked also, 
in the vicinity, several places 
where streams of carburetted 
hydrogen, emanating from the 
earth, readily burnt on the ap- 
plication of flame. 

Mr. Jones, who examined 
the place in the year 1815, 
discovered, in a situation two 
miles higher up the river than 


the mines, some remains of 
ancient buildings, which are 
perhaps ruins of a temple of 
the Nymphs. The rock, it 
seems, is of the same gypsous 
kind as that about Pakhtds. 

? It is particularly described 
by Dion Cassius, 1. 41, c. 45, 
and by AXlian. V. H. 1. 18, 
ce. 16. According to the latter, 


it was called τὸ ἀθάνατον rip, 


as constantly burning. 


380 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


I had quitted in the morning, together with his 
aged predecessor, who had resigned in his favour, 
and the venerable IgGmenos of the convent, all of 
whom were extremely kind to me. Our progress 
was the slower, as 1 found it impossible to hire a 
car for the whole journey, and was obliged to 
change it frequently. On the third day we crossed 
the point of the hill of Spiragr into the plain of 
Topalti, and at night I lodged in a store-house 
among casks, baskets, and bags of corn. Here 
the fever, not having been improved by the jolting 
of an Illyrian cart for three days, -with intervals of 
riding in the sun, assumed a form which is not un- 
common in Italy and Greece, and is called by the 
Italian practitioners a doppia terzana, because the 
fever returns daily, but with increased violence on 
the alternate days. These alternate fits were ac- 
companied by delirium, and on the second occur- 
rence by complete insensibility. 

Oct. 14.—Having been restored by the good 
care and judicious treatment of my friend Sakel- 
lario, to a state just equal to travelling, I quit 
Berat this day for Ioannina, being, in consequence 
of the delay that has occurred, under the necessity 
of giving up the intention of visiting Dyrrhachium, 
and tracing the operations of Pompey, Cesar, and 
Brutus. This has been doubly unfortunate, be- 
cause having intended after visiting the maritime 
Illyria, to follow the entire Egnatian way to Salo- 
niki, I had preferred the direct road from Korytza 
to Berat across Mount Tomor to the circuitous but 
much more interesting route by ‘Akhridha and 
Elbassan, which was a part of that Roman road. 


VIII. | EPIRUS. 381 


At 1 p.m. we cross the bridge of Berat, pass 
through the small Greek quarter called Goritza, 
at the foot of the opposite hill, then skirt the river 
for a quarter of an hour, and enter a valley which 
branches to the right of the main vale of the Uzimi. 
Here the road in many parts passes along the bed of 
a torrent, and at other times over branches of rugged 
barren hills, which exclude the prospect on both 
sides, except that sometimes the rocks of Tomor ap- 
pear on the left. The Uzimzi is at no great distance in 
the same direction ; one of the roads leading from 
Berat to the southward passes along its banks, but 
that which we travel is the most frequented. After 
an hour’s riding the rain begins to fall, and conti- 
nues, with short imtermissions, until at 5.30 we 
arrive at the Khan of Totjer, so called from a vil- 
lage of that name, half a mile distant, in the steep 
hills to the right, and consisting only of a mosque 
and three or four large Mahometan houses. The 
latter part of our road was over a very steep branch 
of the hills, and was, for the most part, paved. 
These heights are cultivated only near several dis- 
persed hamlets of three or four houses, situated 
generally on steep summits. The vegetation bears 
all the marks of an advanced autumn. The Khan 
of Totjer, which stands in a narrow bottom be- 
tween rugged hills, has been lately improved by 
Ibrahim Pasha. Though the doors and windows 
have no security to prevent their being blown open 
by the wind, which perhaps might be too much to 
expect in an Albanian khan, the floor at least is 
much more compact than that of the Πρωτο-Πραγ- 


382 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


parevrnc, or first merchant of Berat, and the roof 
a better defence against the rain—a fortunate cir- 
cumstance, as in consequence of a deluge which 
falls all night, , 

Oct. 15.—The torrents are reported impassable, 
until the afternoon, when it is too late to reach 
Klistira, the nearest place where any provender for 
the horses can be obtained. 

Oct. 16.—At 7.45, continuing our course along 
the ravine, bordered as before by rugged hills, we 
arrive, in less than three quarters of an hour, at a 
stream which flows to the left through a gorge into 
the Uzimi, and from thence, for near half an hour, 
we ascend the bed of this torrent, which is now but 
just safe for the baggage horses. We then turn 
into the channel of a branch of the same river, and 
at 10, crossing a height, descend, in half an hour, 
into a vale watered by a stream which flows to join 
the Vidsa near Klistra. The hills are of the same 
description as those mentioned on the 14th, but 
the cultivation and the hamlets are more thinly 
dispersed. One small village only with a mosque 
was in sight, in a lofty situation on the right. As 
we advance, the great ridge of Trebusin, which 
appears higher on this side than from Tepeléni, 
stretches in a direction parallel to the valley we 
are following, which becomes a little broader as 
we descend it, and is covered with fields of arabositi, 
not yet gathered in. From 11.30 until 1 we halt 
at the khan of Venakos, so called from a village 
of that name situated a mile on the right, amid 
rugged hills at the foot of Mount Trebusin.. On 


VIII. | EPIRUS. 383 


proceeding, our road, every where extremely bad, 
often crosses the river, and then pursues, for a 
short distance, the course of its stony bed: the 
valley is still narrow and grown with maize. On 
the left are hills more rugged, but in other re- 
spects of the same description as before. Behind 
them rises a lofty range, but not so high as Tre- 
busin. 

Thus we continue our route till 3.45, when we 
find ourselves opposite the village and castle of 
Klisura, at the entrance of a valley which is 
here about a mile in width. Instead of follow- 
ing the direct road, which ascends the Vidsa 
to Premedi, we turn to the right, and in eight 
minutes begin to mount a steep slope at the foot 
of the eastern extremity of Mount Trebusin, which 
rises bare and precipitous above it, and soon arrive 
in the scattered village of Klistra, containing about 
one hundred and fifty houses of Musulmans, who 
for the most part speak only Albanian. A little 
beyond the village an immense edge of rock 
descends from the summit of the mountain to the 
river, and forms, together with the opposite moun- 
tain, which is separated from it only by the river 
Vidsa, the eastern entrance of the celebrated pass 
anciently called the Fauces Antigonenses, or Stena 
of the Aous, and now the Stena of the Vidsa. 
Klistra has obviously received its name, which is 
analogous to the Latin Clusium, and other simi- 
lar appellations, from its situation. It is men- 
tioned by Cantacuzenus in the fourteenth century, 
together with other places which are still to be re- 
cognised as having been the chief strong-holds in 


384 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


this part of Greece'. The river, after having 
followed a north-western direction from its sources, 
here suddenly turns a little to the southward of 
west ; and having pursued this course for twelve 
miles, between two high mountains of extreme 
steepness, then recovers its north-western direction, 
which it preserves to the sea. Above the village 
of Klisara, at an elevation of about one-third of the 
summit of the mountain, the Vezir Aly has con- 
structed a castle, consisting only of a square 
white-washed inclosure of a single wall, with a 
tower. at each angle, but perfectly commanding 
the only road into the pass which leads along a 
cornice over the right bank of the Vidsa. The 
castle occupies the site of an ancient fortress, as 
appears from some remains of a Hellenic wall near 
the entrance. Half way between the castle and 
the river stands a serai lately built by Aly Pasha. 

The mountain on the opposite or left bank of 
the river, is the northern extremity of the great 
ridge of Nemértzika, much lower than that sum- 
mit, but nearly equal to Trebusin in height. At 
the top it is a bare perpendicular precipice, but 
the steep lower slope, unlike that of its opposite 
neighbour, is clothed with trees quite to the river. 
Through the opening between them is seen a mag- 
nificent variety of naked precipices and hanging 
woods, inclosing the broad and rapid stream of 
the insinuating river ὅ. 


’ Cantacuz. 1. 2, c. 32. Besides Κλεισοῦρα, he mentions 
ua ty Cathy Kava, Σκρεπάριον, and Τίμωρον, (Tomor.) 
per ipsas angustias qua se inter valles 

ΓΝ (Aous) insinuat.—Liv. 1. 32, ¢, 13. 


VIII. | EPIRUS. 385 


It was on this singular field, in the year B.C. 
198, that the Romans obtained the first and there- 
fore the most important of a series of victories, 
which extinguished for ever the independence of 
Greece. The young consul, T. Quinctius Flami- 
ninus, being resolved to avoid the fault of his two 
predecessors, Sulpicius and Villius, who had al- 
lowed the greater part of their consulships to 
expire before they entered Macedonia, lost no 
time after his election at Rome in crossing the 
Adriatic, from Brundusium to Corcyra, with a 
reinforcement of near 9000 men ; and from thence, 
with equal celerity, proceeded into Epirus, where 
he assumed the command of the Roman army. 
Their camp was at a distance of five miles from 
the enemy: who was intrenched in the pass of 
the Aous, called the Stena, and on the steep moun- 
tains on either side of it, and who had fortified all 
the weaker points with ditches, ramparts, and mili- 
tary engines. Philip had occupied this position 
ever since the beginning of the spring. His main 
body was encamped on Mount A‘ropus, on a con- 
spicuous summit of which his own tent was placed. 
Athenagoras with the light troops was stationed 
on Mount Asnaus, on the opposite side of the 
river. 

Flamininus, after due consideration, adopted the 
intention of his predecessor Villius, and deter- 
mined to force his way through the passes, in- 
stead of entering Macedonia by a circuitous route, 
through Dassaretia, as Sulpicius had done. But 
the undertaking was of extreme difhculty, and 
40 days were passed in inactivity, with the excep- 

VOL. I. δ. ὁ 


386 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


tion only of a fruitless attempt to make peace by 
means of a conference which was held between 
Quinctius and Philip, in the narrowest part of the 
pass, and which was abruptly broken off by the 
king, on hearing the unreasonable propositions of 
the Consul. On the following day there was an 
action first in a plain just large enough to admit 
of it’, and then in the pass into which the Mace- 
donians retired ; and where the superior discipline 
and skill of the Romans were fully compensated by 
the strength of position and the catapeltic engines of 
the Macedonians. The loss on both sides was great, 
and night alone put an end to the combat. Soon 
after this event, Charops of Megara, in Molossis, 
to whom the Romans had already been indebted 
for information and assistance, sent to the Consul 
a shepherd who undertook to guide a detachment 
of the Roman army in three days, by a circuitous 
route, to the summit of the mountain which was 
above and in the rear of the camp of Philip. Four 
thousand infantry and three hundred horsemen 
were sent upon this service, and were ordered to 
march only in the night, the moon being then at 
the full. 

During the two days of their circuitous route, 
the Consul disposed his army for a general attack, 
and at the same time occupied the enemy’s atten- 
tion by frequent assaults. On the third day, when 
he saw the concerted signal made by his troops 
with smoke on the summit of the mountain, he 
moved forward with his whole army, marching 
himself in the centre at the bottom of the valley, 


In planitie, satis ad id patenti, c. 10. 


Vit. | EPIRUS. 387 


and sending forward his wigs on either side. 
The Macedonians advanced out of their intrench- 
ments, but found the enemy so superior to them, 
as well in valour and science as in armour, that 
they retreated again behind their defences. The 
Romans then became the assailants, and would 
have suffered for their rashness, in proceeding 
over very difficult ground against a _ well-forti- 
fied position, had not their detachment on the 
summit of the hill at the same moment advanced 
to the attack of the enemy’s rear; when a shout 
in that direction having revealed the truth to the 
Macedonians, threw them instantly into a dis- 
orderly flight, and their whole army would have 
been destroyed, had it been possible for horsemen 
or heavy armed infantry to pursue with effect over 
such rugged ground. 

The king retreated 5 miles to a height, from 
whence, suspecting that the Romans would be 
unable to follow him, he sent out parties of the 
troops who accompanied him, to collect the re- 
mainder of his dispersed forces from the mountains 
and ravines, and to protect their retreat. By 
these means there were not more than 2000 of his 
men missing, when the army began a disorderly 
retreat towards Thessaly. The next day the Ro- 
mans, who had passed the night in Philip’s camp, 
emerged from the straits, and pursued the enemy. 
On the first day Philip reached a place named 
Castra Pyrrhi, in Melotis; on the following day 
he encamped on Mount Lingon, and from thence, 
after deliberating for some days whether he should 

cc2 


388 EPIRUS. [CHAP 


take the route to Macedonia, he proceeded at length 
to Tricca, in Thessaly’. 

Although it is not expressly stated either by 
Livy or Plutarch, that the camp of Philip was on 
the right side of the river, and that of Athenagoras 
on the left, it could hardly have been otherwise, 
as the road is continuous only on the right bank 
through the whole pass, and as that side alone 
affords such an extent of open space as seems 
absolutely necessary for the encounter which took 
place on the day of Philip’s defeat. The height 
to which the king then retreated seems, from the 
distance mentioned by the historian, to have been 
that of Klistra, which furnished a good defensive 
position, and was well adapted to the king’s de- 
sign, of collecting his scattered forces. Valerius 
Antias, a Latin historian, asserted that Villius, 
while in command of the Roman army, had en- 
tered the pass, thrown a bridge over the river, 
and attacked the enemy ; but Livy opposes to his 
testimony that of all the other Greek and Latin 
writers, who were agreed that Villius had done 
nothing worthy of mention. Hence it is credible 
that Philip was in possession of the entire pass 
until he was attacked by Quinctius, and conse- 
quently, that until that day the Roman camp 
was 5 miles from the western end of the pass, 
probably in the valley of the Dryno, above 
its junction with the Vidsa. The plain, therefore, 
near the western entrance of the pass, between 


1 Liv. |. 32, c. 5, 6, 9, et seq. Plutarch. in Flamin. 


VIII. | EPIRUS. 389 


Kotra and Tepeléni, would seem to have been the 
scene of the combat which occurred on the day 
after the conference between the two commanders. 
If Philip’s camp was on the right bank of the 
Aous, it follows of course that Mount Trebusin is 
the ancient AXropus, and the opposite mountain, 
or northern termination of Mount Nemértzika, the 
ancient Asnaus. Whether the latter name be- 
longed to the whole of that great mountain, it is 
impossible to say, no ancient author having dis- 
tinctly alluded to it, although it is one of the most 
remarkable in Greece. 

Plutarch has added nothing to the narrative of 
the Latin historian worthy of notice, except his 
description of the pass, in which, if he is more 
than usually clear and accurate, it is probably 
because he has borrowed freely from the same 
Greek historian from whom Livy chiefly derived 
his information. Plutarch describes the Straits 
of the Aous as not less strong than the similar 
defile of the Peneius at Tempe: ‘‘ It is deficient,” 
he adds, ‘‘in the beautiful groves, the verdant 
forests, the pleasant retreats, and the meadows 
which border the Peneius; but in the lofty and 
precipitous mountains, in the profundity of the 
narrow fissure between them, in the rapidity and 
magnitude of the river, in the single narrow path 
along the bank, the two places exactly resemble. 
Hence it is dificult for an army to pass under any 
circumstances, and impossible when the place is 


1.5. 


defended by an enemy '. 


‘i δὲ καὶ φυλάττοιτο, παντελῶς confirmed by the fact which 
ἄπορον --- ἃ remark not exactly Plutarch proceeds to relate. 


390 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


In all the editions of Plutarch there is an error 
in the name of the river, which by the substitution 
of a y for an w has been made Apsus instead of 
Aous. That it really is an error cannot admit of 
a doubt, for no position on the Apsus can be 
reconciled with the circumstances of the battle, 
or with those which occurred before and after it. 
Nor does the Apsus, or indeed any other river in 
Greece, flow through a defile which so nearly 
resembles that of the Peneius as these Straits of 
the Vidsa, although they are not to be compared 
to the Thessalian Tempe in beauty and grandeur, 
as well in consequence of the deficiencies remarked 
by Plutarch, as from the smaller dimensions of the 
river, and including mountains which constitute 
the main features of both these defiles. 

Oct. 17.—Having descended to the point of the 
road from Berat to Premedi, from whence we 
turned to Klistra, we proceed from thence at 7.10 
to follow up the valley, until having reached, in. 
about three quarters of an hour, a spot where a 
low branch of the hills on the left touches the 
Vidsa, we pass close along its right bank. The 
river is deep and rapid, but not so much swollen 
as might have been expected after the late rains. 
In a quarter of an hour the valley becomes wider 
again ; the chief produce continues to be maize ; 
the upper part of the plant has been cut off for 
the cattle, the pods alone remaining on the stem 
to ripen in the sun. Musulman tombs are fre- 
quent on the road side, and the same was observ- 
able in every part of the district of Berat. The 
ridge of Nemértzika follows the same south-easterly 
direction as before, and so continues as far as Pa- 


VIII. | EPIRUS. 391 


led Pogdghiani: the highest summit is a little to 
the southward of Premedi. On our left are some 
secondary heights which unite Tomor and the 
mountain of Skrepari with the central range of 
Pindus, and which have a general direction paral- 
lel to Nemértzika ; they are very uneven in their 
forms, but are cultivated in many parts. 

At a turning of the hills, an hour from Premedi, 
we come in sight of its castle, situated on a low 
acclivity overhanging the Vidsa, at the foot of the 
steep slope of Mount Nemértzika. The town lies 
to the eastward of the castle, in a narrow bottom 
on the side of the river, which for a considerable 
distance below the town, flows rapid, full, and 
turbid, between banks composed of a rock which 
is a congregate of small pebbles united by a white 
cement. Where this substance prevails as it does 
immediately opposite to the town, and for some 
distance below it, the valley is quite barren, while 
in higher situations, especially on the eastern hills, 
the land is fertile and well cultivated. At 10.30 
we cross the Viosa by a bridge, and enter the 
town. 

Premedi', sometimes called Permedi, or Per- 
méti, contains about 300 Musulman and 100 
Christian families. The houses are built of loose 
stones. put together without cement—a kind of ma- 
sonry not uncommon in Albania; and few of them 
have walls which are quite perpendicular. That 
which is assigned me for a lodging, belonging to a 
tailor now absent, is tolerably comfortable within, 


* Πρεμεντή. 


392 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


and far better than any I saw at Berat. One of 
the most remarkable objects is a high rock on the 
northern side of the town, towards the river, the 
summit of which is surrounded by a ruined wall, 
containing within it a pool of water supposed to 
possess medicinal virtues. According to the local 
tradition, Premedi belonged once to the Spaniards. 
Above the town the Vezir Aly has lately built a 
new fortress, in the form of an oblong quadrangle, 
flanked with towers at the angles, and at intervals 
also on the sides. It stands like many such con- 
structions in Turkey, on a slope, and one angle is 
commanded at a very short distance. The castle 
was prolonged on the descent in great measure 
for the purpose of including an old ruinous Serai, 
which Aly’s avarice not allowing him to pull 
down, he has thus, as he now admits, injured his 
castle, without escaping from the necessity of 
constructing a new Serai near the upper wall. 
An Italian renegade calling himself Suliman Aga, 
who has been employed as engineer on this occa- 
sion, informs me that he did not find any traces 
of antiquity when he cleared and dug the ground 
for the foundations, though it is the spot where 
the Acropolis is likely to have been, if Premedi 
was an ancient site, which is highly probable. 
The great ridge of Nemértzika rises with extra- 
ordinary abruptness behind the castle. Beyond 
it is the valley of Zagoria, watered by the stream 
which continues through that of Kieperia, and 
joins the Vidsa in the pass of Klistra. Zagoria 
consists of several villages, inhabited chiefly by 
Christian artisans and travelling tradesmen ; some 


γι. EPIRUS. 393 


of whom proceed as far as Germany. Between 
Zagoria and Libékhovo is the district of Liuntja. 

Mukhtar Pasha, who is stationed here by his 
father, in consequence of some suspicions of war 
with the Pasha of Skodra; and because the place 
is centrical, and convenient for collecting the 
Toshke, returns this afternoon from a hunting 
party at Eletsa, a village in the mountains, four 
hours distant. This name is remarkable for its 
Greek form, amidst so many others ‘of indigenous 
or Sclavonic derivation, and tends to the belief 
that Eleus, which Ptolemy enumerates among the 
inland cities of Chaonia, was situated at Eledsa. 
But in this case Eleus was a different place from 
the plain Eleon mentioned by Livy, which was 
evidently that of Arghyrokastro. It will be neces- 
sary also to suppose that Ptolemy is in error in re- 
gard to the province to which he attributes Eleus 
—namely, Chaonia: for the valley of Premedi 
was certainly not a part of Chaonia, but lay be- 
tween the Atintanes and the tribes of Upper Mace- 
donia, and probably belonged to the Paravei, who 
received that name as dwelling on the banks of 
the Aua, which appears to have been one of the 
ancient names of the Vidsa. I am inclined to 
believe, therefore, that although Eleisa may be 
an ancient name preserved, it has nothing in com- 
mon with the Eleus of Chaonia. 

Oct. 19.—At 10.30, proceeding from Premedi, 
we continue to follow the route by which Philip 
fled before the victorious legions of Rome. At 
11.20 we cross to the nght bank of the river by a 
somewhat dangerous ford, at a spot where the stream 


394 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


is compressed between rocks of the same kind as 
those near Premedi. It is a position in which 
Philip’s rear-guard might easily have checked a 
pursuing enemy; but as Quinctius did not com- 
plete his march through the Straits until the day 
after the battle’, and Philip seems not to have 
lost a moment in commencing his retreat, there 
was little chance of his being overtaken. 

Beyond the ford of the Vidsa the valley is in no 
part more than a quarter of a mile in breadth, be- 
ing bounded to the right by the last falls of the 
abrupt Nemértzika, and on the other side by a conti- 
nuation of the parallel range of rugged hills which 
I before described. In some places there is no 
valley, and the road crosses over the hills. At 
2.40 we turn out of the main route to the left, and 
ascend the rugged heights in order to gain the vil- 
lage of Tjerséva ’ for our konak ; the steep acclivities 
are clothed with shrubs; of which the most com- 
mon are the arbutus and andrachne, both covered 
with a mixture of blossoms and ripe fruit. The 
first has a smooth red stem, large leaves like a 
laurel, and a small tasteless fruit, growing in a 
racemus ; the andrachne a rough brown stem, 
small serrated dark-coloured leaves, and a larger 
fruit growing singly. Both plants are called κου- 
μαριὰ, which is the ancient κόμαρος, little changed. 
Tzerséva, which we reach in fifty minutes from the 
valley, stands on the eastern side of the ridge, just 
below the summit, and contains forty-five houses, 


* Postero die, per ipsas an- 1. 32, c. 13. 
gustias hostem sequitur.— Liv. ? Τζερσόβα. 


Vill. | EPIRUS. 395 


surrounded by vineyards, below which are a few 
corn-fields on the slope. All the mountains around 
are much broken and intersected by ravines: the 
summits near Konitza are conspicuous to the east- 
ward, with the branches of the same range towards 
Mount Russotari. On the opposite side of the 
valley of the Aous, and almost immediately above 
the point from which we began to mount the hills, 
are the most precipitous of those great cliffs of Ne- 
mértzika which are so remarkable from loannina 
and other distant places: the summits of these 
rocks are hid in the clouds, while their bases are 
but a little above the level of the valley and river. 
They are probably between two and three thou- 
sand feet in height. 

Oct. 20.—At 7 we descend by a rugged path, 
and in three quarters of an hour re-enter the main 
road in the valley of the Vidsa, at a spot which is 
about thirty-five minutes from where we left it. 
The valley is narrow and grown with maize: the 
lower slope of Mount Nemértzika, though still ex- 
ceedingly steep, is more practicable than before, 
and there is a monastery upon it, as well as one 
or two small villages, which, like those on the hills 
to our left, are inhabited by Musulman Albanians. 
At 9.5 we ford a large branch of the Vidsa, of 
which the sources are in the mountains on the 
left, near Khierasovo. At the junction, the Vidsa, 
by means of a derivation perhaps artificial, forms 
a large island, at the upper point of which is a 
mill, turned by a part of the water of a cascade 
which falls over the bank of the Vidsa; behind 


396 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


these objects an old deserted monastery completes 
a most picturesque scene. 

At 9.20 we cross the main river by a bridge 
high and narrow, and with scarcely any defences 
on the sides. Here again the stream, being com- 
pressed between the rocks, is narrow, and too 
deep to be forded, though below at the mill it was 
so shallow as to be forded by asses. Immediately 
after crossing the river we begin to ascend a lofty 
root of Nemértzika, and at 9.40, near the summit 
of the ridge, pass Ostanitza, once a place of im- 
portance, but now small: the people have built a 
khan on the road, which, affording better accom- 
modation than any of thea own huts, relieves them 
from the lodging of travellers. Ostanitza, being 
about thirty-two miles by the road from Klisura, 
and lying in the dirgction which Philip was pur- 
suing towards the modern districts of Zagori and 
Métzovo, is probably the position of the Castra 
Pyrrhi, at which the king arrived in his retreat 
on the afternoon of the first day after the battle. 
The position was exactly suited to his cireum- 
stances, being a strong height, well defended in 
the direction of the enemy by the narrow gorge 
through which the river passes immediately below 
Ostanitza. No remains of antiquity, however, are 
to be observed here. 

At the summit of the ridge of Ostanitza we arrive 
in sight of Konitza, a large town, situated on the 
right bank of the Vidsa, at the foot of an abrupt 
termination of the central range of Pindus, but 
considerably elevated above the valley. It ap- 


VIII. | EPIRUS. 397 


pears to contain 800 or 1000 houses. The adja- 
cent mountain is rugged, broken by torrents, and 
covered with wood: behind it rise the bare preci- 
pices of Mount Lazari, one of the highest points 
of the central range, often called the mountain of 
Papingo, from a village at its foot belonging to 
the sub-district of loannina, named Zagori. The 
heights of Konitza are separated from those of 
Ostanitza by a plain about six miles in dia- 
meter, through which the Vidosa winds along 
a broad stony bed, and then, entering the hills, 
pursues a serpentine course for two miles through 
them in approaching Ostanitza, beyond which it 
passes through the narrow glen, a little above the 
island to which 1 before alluded. In the plain the 
Vidsa is joined by another great component branch 
of the Aous called the Voidhomati, (ox eye, or 
fountain,) which issues from a deep ravine of the 
mountains of Zagéri, a few miles to the south-east 
of Kénitza : the Vidsa itself enters the plain imme- 
diately below Konitza, through a narrow opening 
between two precipices higher and more abrupt 
even than those of Klisara. 

Our road now leads through a wood of oaks of 
small size and of various kinds. At 10.20 we 
halt twenty minutes at a fountain in the middle of 
the wood to dine; then descend the hill into a 
narrow valley, where at 12.30 Mavrovini, a Za- 
gorite village, is near us on the left, and two miles 
on the right Pogoghiani, which, though small, 
gives name to a district extending northward from 
thence to the sources of the Sukha, or branch of 


398 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


the Dryno, which enters the plain of Derdpoli at 
Libékhovo. Delvinaki is now the chief town. 
The great cliffs of Nemértzika terminate above 
Ostanitza, where they suddenly fall to a lower 
woody branch which connects that mountain 
with a high rocky peak to the northward of 
Delvinaki. Between the latter and an inferior 
range, which has a northerly direction, stretches a 
long slope, on which appear some of the villages of 
Pogoghiani: through an opening at its northern 
extremity I recognize the summit near Labovo, 
called Strakavétzi, and to the left of it one side of 
the Klisara of Libékhovo. At the end of the valley 
we ascend a steep hill, and a little beyond the 
summit arrive, at 1.15, at Ravéni, containing 
eighty poor houses, and included among the vil- 
lages of Zagori. 

It is probable that our road from Ostanitza to 
this place has no longer coincided with the route 
of Philip, and that in his second day’s march he 
followed a more eastern line, crossing the plain to 
the westward of Konitza, and making as direct a 
course as possible to the highlands of Zagori, which 
he may have conveniently entered about Artzista. 
Livy’s description of Mount Lingon is so exactly 
applicable to Zagori, that we cannot doubt the iden- 
tity, nor that he adopted that description from Poly- 
bius, who was well acquainted with the country. 
The Latin historian remarks that Lingon (in Greek 
Aiyyoc, or Λίγγον) was a mountainous district of 
Epirus, bordering on Macedonia northward, and 
on Thessaly eastward, covered with woods, but in 


VIII. | EPIRUS. 399 


the higher parts containing open plains and peren- 
nial waters'. Although it might be more correct 
to say ‘‘ fertile valleys,” than ‘‘open plains,” in 
reference to Zagori, the only plain properly so 
called being that of Imperatoria, the description 
leaves at least no question that the line of Philip’s 
retreat was through Zagori to Imperatoria, where 
he was probably encamped while undecided whe- 
ther he should retreat into Macedonia or Thessaly ; 
for at one end of that plain the road to Grevena, in 
Upper Macedonia, begins to cross the great ridge 
of Pindus ; and from the other end branches that 
which leads over the Zygos of Métzovo into Upper 
Thessaly. The name Lingon I should conceive 
to have been particularly attached to those sum- 
mits in the middle of Zagori, which are em- 
braced on the north and east by the extreme 
branches of the Aous, and on the west and 
south by those of the Arachthus. It is remarkable 
that one of the villages of Zagori is named Linghi- 
adhes*. It is situated on the eastern side of Mit- 
zikéli, which mountain is separated only by the 
valley of the northern branch of the Arachthus from 
the mountain which I imagine to have been the 
proper Lingon. As soon as Philip had arrived on the 
second day of his retreat within the recesses of this 
mountainous district, he might encamp wherever 


* Postero die (ingens iter Macedonia objicitur. Vestiti 
agminis, sed metus urgebat) in frequentibus silvis sunt: juga 
montem Lingon perrexit: ipsi summacampos patentes, aquas- 


montes Epiri sunt, interjecti que perennes habent. — Liv. 
Macedoniz Thessalizeque. La- 1. 32, c. 13. 
tus, quod vergit in Thessaliam, 2 Λιγγιάδες. 


oriens spectat: septentrio ἃ 


400 EPIRUS. - [ CHAP. 


he found it convenient; but even if he advanced 
no farther than the valleys eastward of Sudhena 
and Dovra, his horizontal distance was more than 
equal to that of the preceding day, besides which 
there was a considerable increase of elevation, so 
that the ‘‘ ingens iter agminis” of Livy seems per- 
fectly justified. 

Oct. 21.—A violent fall of rain last night, which 
continues all this day, with a strong gale from the 
south, detains me in the cottage of the papas of 
Raveéni, in a wretched chamber pervious to the wea- 
ther on all sides. 

Oct. 22.—At 7.15 we descend into a small cul- 
tivated plain to the south of Ravéni, from whence 
the road winds through low barren hills till 8, 
when it enters a plain which is included between 
the last falls of the mountains of Zagori and a steep 
ridge on the western side. This plain, which 
contains the sources of the Kalama and a small 
lake, is nearly as broad as long, and is ten or 
twelve miles in circumference. We skirt it at the 
foot of the hills which border it on the east, and at 
8.20 arrive at the khan of Kalbaki, lately built by 
the Vezir on the edge of the plain. We then enter 
a narrow vale, in few places cultivated, between 
two ranges of low barren hills. Those on the right 
increase in height to the westward, and upon one 
of the highest points of them is situated a village 
called Zagoria. We continue to pursue the tedious 
course of this uninteresting vale till 10.40, when — 
we find ourselves at the foot of Mount Mitzikéli, 
above the northern end of the Lake of Lapsista, 
where the village of Petjali’ is half a mile on the 


1 Πετζιαλή. 


VII. | EPIRUS. 401 


right, not far from the bank. The abundance of 
rain has maintained the lake at its highest all this 
year. A further descent of half an hour brings us, 
at 11.50, to the Khan of Lykostomo, situated at 
the eastern end of a causeway, or long bridge, here 
crossing the narrowest part of the marsh, which 
unites the Lake of Ioannina with that of Lapsista. 
The causeway of Lykdostomo is the only direct 
communication between Zagori and the plain of 
Joannina. Having remained at the khan till 1.40, 
we cross the causeway and the plain, and arrive at 
the entrance of the city at 3.3. Here 1 am lodged 
for a few days at the house of the Bishop of Arta, 
and then remove to that of S. B., a young man 
who inherited from his father 800 purses, all which, 
with the assistance of the Vezir, he has long since 
got rid of. He was a frequenter, like other young 
men of fashion, of the house of the celebrated Fro- 
syni'. But he was not always so refined in his 
female society, and the Vezir, who is very rigorous 
on these subjects when it suits his purpose, and 
who had an eye to a share of Kyr S.’s fortune, set 
the police to watch and arrest him on the spot, and 
by threatening a public example, extracted 400 
purses from him. 

As to the famous πνίξιμον, that atrocious act 
which seems first to have shown Aly’s subjects to 
what an extent his pitiless disposition could carry 
him in a single act of cruelty, I have received the 
following particulars from Kyr N. G. of Kalar/tes, 
whose wife was one of the sufferers. The Vezir 


' Evgpoovyn. 
TOL. ¥. pd 


402 EPIRUS. | CHAP. 


invited himself to supper at the Kalarytiote’s house, 
an expensive favour, which he is wont to confer 
occasionally on his confidential servants, of whom 
Kyr G. is one. Here he collected his intended 
victims, either by sending the bolu-bashi of the 
police for them, or proceeding himself on horse- 
back to their respective residences. From the 
house of G. he went on foot to that of Frosyni, 
which he entered at the back by climbing over a 
part of the neighbouring house. He thus appeared 
suddenly before Frosyni, and without saying a 
word, made a motion to the bolu-bashi, signifying 
that she was to be conveyed with the others to 
prison. The relations of G.’s wife say that her 
husband was privy to the Vezir’s intentions, and 
that when she was preparing to appear before the 
Pasha, in obedience to his summons, her husband, 
in order to save her trinkets and best clothes, told 
her that the Pasha wished to make her some pre- 
sent, and might be indisposed from doing so if she 
made too great a display of dress. The Kalarytiote 
himself, however, denies all knowledge of his 
master’s intentions, which seems much more pro- 
bable; and although his suspicions could hardly 
have been short of conviction, when the women 
were collected at his house, it would have been in 
vain for him then to attempt any interference. He 
asserts, that when the design became manifest, he 
made every effort to move the Vezir’s compassion 
for his own wife, without effect. The women were 
all conveyed to the church of St. Nicolas at the 
northern extremity of the lake: so much time 
however had been consumed in assembling them, 


VIIT. | EPIRUS. 403 


that the morning returned before boats could be 
obtained from the island, the fishermen, moreover, 
refusing to assist without a written order; so that 
as Turkish custom requires darkness to be added 
to the other horrors of this mode of punishment, it 
was not until the following midnight, in the midst 
of one of those furious thunder-storms so common 
in loannina, that the women were collected in five 
or six boats, and not being inclosed in sacks accord- 
ing to the practice of Constantinople, the Albanians 
were under the necessity of using force when they 
clung to the sides of the monoxyla. 

During the intervening day, such was the state 
of the Vezir’s mind and appearance, that no one 
dared to approach him ; and it unfortunately hap- 
pened that Bishop Ignatius, who would certainly 
have made some attempt to save the wretched 
victims, arrived only at Ioannina a day or two 
after the event. The Pasha has since observed to 
more than one person, with a pointed allusion to 
this event, that he has no good counsellors ; thus 
showing the probability that he would at least 
have spared some of the women for a good ran- 
som. Frosyni' was niece of the bishop of Gre- 
vena, and was about 28 years of age; she is said 
to have been witty and accomplished, and seems 
to have revived exactly the ancient Greek cha- 
racter of an éraioa. The loannites speak with 
pride and affection of her, and seem to consider 
the existence of such a person at Ioannina as 
proving their superiority to the rest of Greece in 
civilization, not less than a bookshop in the Bazar 
and their two colleges for education. Frosyni’s 

pd2 


404 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


coterie, however, was better suited to France or 
Italy than to Greece in its present state, and was 
attended with extreme danger in a Turkish town, 
where the example of a person of good family had 
a pernicious effect among the Greek women, while 
it was viewed with abhorrence or envy by the 
Turkish. The jealous complaints of Mukhtar’s 
wife to her father-in-law were chiefly directed 
against Frosyni: those of her sister, the wife of 
Vely, against two or three married women; and 
these accusations were undoubtedly the immediate 
cause of the horrible result’. The whole number 
who suffered were 17, of whom five or six only 
were of the higher class. The bodies were not 
all collected for several days, during which time 
the Satrap remained inclosed in his harem to 
avoid witnessing the indignation of the Greeks of 
Joannina, which for a moment got the better of 
their prudence, and showed itself by their attend- 
ing the funerals in great numbers, particularly 
that of Frosyni. 

Nov. 1.—A sharp frost in the morning: the 
lake is now peopled with astonishing numbers of 
the duck tribe, which often furnish good sport to 
the Ioannites. The Vezir and his sons often have 
a battue, which lasts the greater part of the day. 
As the Pasha permits any body to accompany 


1 Drowning seems to have 
been not an uncommon punish- 
ment for females among the 
ancient Greeks. It is related 
both of Periander, king of Co- 
rinth, and of Cleomenes, tyrant 


of Methymna, that they ordered 
several women of irregular con- 
duct to be sewn up in sacks 
and thrown into the sea.— 
Theopomp. et Hermip. ap. 
Athen. 1]. 10, ο. 12. 


VIII. | EPIRUS. 405 


him, every boat in Ioannina is in requisition on 
such occasions. They proceed in a long line 
through the narrow channels which pervade the 
papyria, and thus surround the cover where the 
birds are collected, when a sudden shout being 
given, they rise and are brought down by scores. 
They are generally very fat at this time of the 
year, but in general coarse and ill-flavoured. 

Aly’s intentions are at present directed towards 
Margariti and Paramythia, and his Albanians 
have lately taken Koranépulo in Fanari, a village 
belonging to Hassan Tjapari, of Margariti. His- 
Highness declares his intention of building a new 
fortress and palace at Litharitza, an important 
point to the security of loannina, being a com- 
manding height not far from the lake, at a dis- 
tance of 600 yards from the south-eastern tower 
of the citadel. It commands every approach to 
the town from the southward, and enfilades the 
whole length of it in a northern direction, and 
will thus give the Vezir a command over his 
capital which can never be obtained from the 
castle, while the latter is an excellent citadel, and 
would furnish a secure retreat if the post of Litha- 
ritza were lost. 

The Pasha’s avaricious disposition carries him 
to such a length, that he never allows any worn- 
out piece of furniture, or arms or utensils to be 
thrown away, but lays them in places well known 
to him, and would discover the loss of the smallest 
article. In the dirty passages and antichambers 
leading to some of the grandest apartments of his 
palace, and which have cost some thousands to fit 


406 EPIRUS. [CHAP 
> 


up, the worn out stock of a pistol, or a rusty 
sword, or a scabbard, or some ragged articles of 
dress, may be seen hanging up, which his nu- 
merous domestics never venture to remove, well 
knowing that it would be remarked by him. 
This mixture of magnificence and meanness is 
very striking in every part of the palace. His 
great apartment covered with a Gobelin carpet, 
surrounded with the most costly sofas, musical 
clocks, and mirrors, is defended by cross iron 
bars, rougher than would be considered tolerable 
in the streets of London. They are intended to 
prevent’ his servants from passing through the 
windows when the chamber is locked. 

Having had occasion when I was at Corfu to 
transmit a small sum of money to the Vezir, | 
sent it purposely through the hands of Mehmét, 
the Roman, in the hope that when he presented 
it, his highness would make him a present of 
it. In a fit of generosity he did so; but not 
long afterwards changed his mind, and sent his 
treasurer for it. One year he gave the super- 
intendence of the collection of his revenues and 
rents to the bishop of Arta, with the mjunction 
that it should be done καλὰ, which word the 
bishop well knew did not convey any intention of 
forbearance. The new system failed not im pro- 
ducing a greater amount than usual, but numerous 
complaints having followed, the Vezir informed 
the complainants that they might apply to the 
bishop for a remission in their uext contributions, 
amounting altogether to 80 purses. For these 80 
purses, however, he never allowed the bishop any 


VIII. | EPIRUS. 407 


credit in the account between them, thus pocket- 
ing the increase, and leaving the bishop to settle 
it as he best might with the villages. Though the 
Greek prelates suffer in this manner occasionally, 
he is too well aware of their importance in the 
government of the Christian population, and as 
instruments of extortion, to treat them with ex- 
treme harshness. Indeed, he generally favours 
the Dhespotes, as he qualifies them, much more 
than the Turkish Beys, and seldom denies the 
bishops a little military assistance in obtaining 
their personal dues. Not long ago, however, he 
almost frightened to death the Bishop of Grevena, 
a mild and timid man, by a proceeding which was 
meant to increase the bishop’s authority. Being 
about to visit Grevena, he ordered the bishop to 
prepare the episcopal palace for his reception, but 
instead of proceeding there went to another ko- 
nak, pretending to believe that the bishop had so 
ordered it. Having sent for the unfortunate “A-yioc 
Γρεβενῶν, or Holy of Grevena, he assumed an air 
of extreme anger, ordered the bishop to prison, 
and issued a proclamation that all persons having 
complaints against him should make a statement 
of them. Nobody having appeared, the Vezir sent 
for him the next day, and congratulated him on 
the proof that he had no enemies, and that he 
governed his flock with kindness and justice. 

Nov. 11:—Visiting the Pasha this afternoon, 
previously to my departure, I find him sitting in 
his state apartment, in close conference with a 
Bektashli Sheikh, whose sect he affects to favour. 
During our conference he employs himself in select- 


408 EPIRUS. [CHAP. VIII. 


ing some large pearls for a chaplet of beads, which 
two Greek jewellers have brought. 1 was after- 
wards informed that he purchased twenty-four of 
these pearls for fifty purses: though of course un- 
commonly large, they are not round or regular. 
He added some which he before possessed, and 
two emeralds of the same size, to make up thirty- 
three, one of the legitimate numbers of a chaplet. 
This he afterwards wore, for the first time, at a 
supper, to which he invited himself, at the house of 
Mehmét the Roman, and who was thus put to an 
expence of two or three hundred piastres. 


CHAPTER IX. 


EPIRUS, THESSALIA. 


Departure from Joannina—Dhrysko—River Arta—Tria Khania 
—Métzovo—Passage of the Zygés—Sources of the Salam- 
vria—Khan Malakassi—Khan Kotovazdhi—River of Klinovo 
— Metéora—Kalabaka or Staghts, igintum—IIlustrations of 
ancient history—Mount Kotziaka—Trikkala, river Letheus, 
Tricca—Khassia—K ardhiki—K olokot6—Tzighioti—Grisano 
—Zarko—River Salamvria, Penetus— Alifaka— Larissa — 
Crannonia—River Fersaliti, or Enipeus—Feérsala, Pharsalus 
—Vrysia—Ghynekokastro, Proerna—Dhomok6o, Thaumaci— 
Plain of Taukli—Xynia, lake Xynias—Maliac forest—Furka 
Dervéni—Arrival at Zitini. 


Nov. 12.—After six or seven clear calm days, with 
a light north-east wind, the appearance of the wea- 
ther alters this morning, just as lam about to leave 
Ioannina for Larissa and Athens, and threatens a 
difficult passage over the Pindus. 

The water of the lake, which in the months of 
July and August reached to the paved road at the 
foot of the rocks of Kastritza, is now near a mile 
distant from thence ; and all that extremity of the 
lake is dry, with the exception of a few marshy 
spots. The reeds are either cut down or withered, 
and some large spaces, which in the summer were 
covered with water, have since that time produced 
a crop of coarse grass, which has lately beer mown 


410 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


with the scythe. Through this desiccated termina- 
tion of the lake, a small stream flows to the extre- 
mity, and there enters some cavities at the foot of 
the rocks along which the road passes. These 
openings are called the khonéftres ', or katavothra, 
the latter being the common Greek word for such 
channels, and the former the term more peculiar 
to Ioannina. The place, according to Meletius, is 
named Voinikovo. In three hours we arrive at the 
khan of Dhrysko. Although spacious and recently 
built, it is already out of repair, and in the best 
room half the ceiling is wanting, and a shutter to 
one of the windows. In an instant, however, an 
immense pile of fuel from the brushwood which 
covers the hill is brought in, and a blazing fire 
soon appears upon the hearth. The shop attached 
to the khan supplies raki, eggs, and new wine. 
Nov. 13.—Setting out from Dhrysko at 8.30 we 
arrive, in a little more than three hours, at the 
Triakhania, travelling, as in September last, chiefly 
along the bed of the river, which in winter is some- 
times entirely filled: in that case, if the bridges 
were broken down, the road would be quite im- 
practicable ; it seldom happens, however, even in 
winter, for many days together, that it is necessary 
to follow the Akres all the way. Having crossed 
the river beyond Triakhania, we follow the left 
bank to the point of junction of the branches from 
Métzovo and the mountain of Khaliki; and ford- 
ing the latter, proceed, for upwards of half an 
hour, along a road overhanging the ravine of the 


" Xwvevrpac—digesters. 


12 


Ix. | EPIRUS. 411 


Métzovo branch, when at the end of two hours and 
five minutes from Triakhania, we arrive at Anilio, 
where I am lodged in a neat Vlakhiote cottage, 
which has a plastered floor and walls, and an air 
of comfort unknown in the houses of the Greek 
peasants. The town is half buried in snew, and 
long icicles hang from the eaves of the houses. 
We lost a short time towards the end of our jour- 
ney by meeting a great number of asses and mules 
coming from Thessaly, laden chiefly with flour. 
These caravans were moving heaps of snow, and 
had passed the Zygos, or ridge of Métzovo, with 
difficulty, on account of the violence of the wind. 
Those who attempted it latest were obliged to 
leave their φορτώματα, or burthens, on the top of 
the mountain. The Papa-Proestés of Anilio in- 
forms me that they have had similar weather, with 
little variation, these fifteen days, during a great 
part of which it was clear and calm at Ioannina. 
Nov. 14.—Although much snow has fallen in 
the night, and the weather still continues squally, 
the Métzovites report the mountain passable; we 
set out therefore at 8.30, and follow the left side 
of the glen of Métzovo for a quarter of an hour, 
and afterwards the bed of a torrent which joins that 
from the plain of Imperatoria a mile above the 
town. Wesoon enter the clouds, and lose sight 
of all objects at more than a few yards’ distance ; 
and quittmg the torrent, begin to mount the Zygos 
by a zigzag road. In ascending, the snow becomes 
deeper, lying in drifted heaps, and forming hil- 
locks, under which the shrubs are buried. Box 
and pine are the most common trees, and become 


412 EPIRUS. [CHAP. 


more plentiful as we ascend. The east wind comes 
over the ridge in squalls with a piercing keenness. 
Where the snow has been blown away, and the 
rocky surface left bare, the narrow slippery path on 
the side of the steep slope is not a little hazardous. 
The road on the lee side of the mountain is gene- 
rally in this state m winter, because the wind, 
coming over the ridge in squalls, drives away the 
snow from the rocky parts, and hence the lee side 
is considered the more difficult, unless the quantity 
of snow on the weather side be such as to render it 
quite impassable. I hired three conductors from 
Métzovo, whose business it is to trace the road 
wherever it is entirely covered, to support the 
horses where it is bare and slippery, and if the 
horse cannot be saved from falling over the side of 
the hill, to drag off the rider. As it is impossible 
to save baggage and merchandize with the same 
celerity, the loads are often left on the top of the 
mountain till the weather improves, but this seldom 
happens when they come from the westward, be- 
cause the Métzovites are well acquainted with the 
disposition of their mountain, and will not venture 
without a certainty of passing. We are accom- 
panied by the mules sent to resume their loads, 
which we find just at the foot of the highest ridge 
on the western side. Here we dismount, in order 
to make the last ascent of about fifty paces on foot. 
This little interval, however, is so steep and slip- 
pery that, not having yet recovered from the effects 
of my Apollonian fever, I should have been some 
time in reaching the summit, had not two of my 
guides, each taking an arm, hauled me up, and 


1X. | EPIRUS. 413 


then running down the steep on the opposite side, 
saved me the trouble of making a step. The road 
on the sharp summit passes between two rocks, on 
one of which is a kénisma! of St. Nicolas, whom 
they invoke as they pass, and hence the place is 
called Aio Nikola. 

The proper Zygés terminates at no great dis- 
tance to our right, beyond which rises the summit 
called Dhokimi, connected by means of the heights 
behind Anilio with the summit above Khaliki. 
Beyond St. Nicolas we immediately enter a forest 
of beeches loaded with snow, which lies upon the 
ground four or five feet deep, or more than double 
its average depth on the other side of the ridge. 
This is said to be generally the case, whether the 
wind be from Thessaly or Epirus, for though the 
snow generally falls in much greater quantity in 
the latter case, sometimes covering the ground to 
the depth of several feet in the course of a night, 
it seldom remains long unmelted on that side. The 
easterly winds, on the contrary, being frosty, the 
snow is more permanent, falling commonly in a 
fine powder ; whereas from the southward or west- 
ward it descends in large flakes. The two winds 
most noted at Métzovo for foul weather are called 
Patrinds and Avlonitis’, names indicating the 
directions of south and north-west, but compre- 
hending under the one or the other denomination 
many of the intermediate points. It 15 remarkable 


* εἰκόνισμα, a little pillar of to hold a small picture of the 
stone, in which there is a niche _ saint. 
5 Πατρινὸς, Αὐλωνίτης. 


‘ 


414 EPIRUS. | CHAP. 


that the snow lies at present upon the ground as 
far down the valley to the westward as Tria- 
khania, while upon the highest points to the 
northward, and on Tzikuréla, and the neighbour- 
ing heights in the opposite direction, which are 
many hundred feet higher than the Zygés, there 
is only a slight sprinkling on the summits. Mounts 
Tzumérka and Kakardhista are more deeply co- 
vered. This peculiarity of the Zygos is probably 
caused by its position between much higher moun- 
tains to the north and south, at the same time that 
it is the ridge of separation between two long nar- 
row valleys which lie in a transverse direction to 
the chain. The wind is thus drawn up the one or 
the other of the two valleys, and is confined to 
those two opposite directions, while the Zygos in 
either case intercepts the vapours. 

The forests which cover this part of the Pindus 
consist chiefly of firs' and beeches’. On the 
Zygos, beeches are only found near the summit, 
lower down are firs, and still lower, small oaks. 
In the latter end of February and beginning of 
March, at which time the snow generally collects 
on the ridge in the greatest quantity, the beeches, 
although lofty trees, have their stems sometimes 
buried, and the ridge is impassable for many days, 
except to foot passengers: nor would it be practi- 
cable at all during strong winds, but for the shelter 
afforded by the trees. Hence they are carefully 
preserved. The firs on the western side, on the 
contrary, are used for fuel, and are diminishing. 


1 ἐλάτια. ὀξυαίς. 


1X. | EPIRUS. 415 


The Zygés of Métzovo is geographically the 
most remarkable mountain in Greece. Situated 
in the heart of Pindus as to its breadth, and cen- 
trally also in the longitudinal chain which per- 
vades the continent from north to south, it gives 
rise to five principal rivers, in fact to all the great 
streams of Northern Greece except the Spercheius : 
north-eastward to the Halacmon, south-eastward to 
the Peneius, southward to the Achelous, south-west- 
ward to the Arachthus, and north-westward to the 
Aous. 

Remounting our horses a few hundred yards 
below St. Nicholas, we proceed in half an hour to 
a fountain, where our guides leave us, and where 
the beech wood ends. The zigzag road continues 
with a diminishing depth of snow for another hour, 
when we arrive, at 11.30, upon a part of the slope 
of the mountain, where in the bottom of a deep 
ravine to the right, flows the Salamvria, or Salam- 
bria', composed chiefly of the streams collected 
from the eastern face of Mount Dhokimi. At 12 
this river is joined by a branch from the northward, 
which rises at the yadaxrirne λίθος, or milkstone, a 
rock so called because there is a calcareous deposit 
at the fountain which has the reputation at Métzovo 
and other neighbouring villages of having the effect, 
when pounded and mixed with water, of promoting 
a woman’s milk. Although this is not so distant a 
source as that of the southern branch, it was very 
probably the reputed origin of the Peneius, from 
being the most remarkable of its fountains. The 


* Σαλαμβρίας, Σαλαμπρίας. 


416 EPIRUS. [ CHAP. 


road from Métzovo, by the milk-stone, passes not 
far from the site of Imperatoria, and descends to 
the Salamvria by the monastery of Libokhovo'. 
At the junction of the two branches stands a khan 
named that of Malakash’, from avillage situated half 
an hour above it on the mountain to the left. Here 
we remain until 2 p.m., then immediately crossing 
the northern river by a bridge, continue for a short 
time along the left bank of the united stream, which 
is not large, but very winding, with a general 
course of S.S. Εἰ. 

The mountains on either side have a more gra- 
dual slope than those which border the river Arta 
below Métzovo, and the passage of this valley would 
be easier to an army than that of the Arachthus. 
The woody summits rising above the akres or ex- 
treme points, clothed with oak, which overhang the 
river, present, as they fold over one another, a con- 
tinuation of beautiful scenery. As we advance, the 
snow, which at Khan Malakassi was lying on the 
ground, retires to a higher limit on the hills. We 
follow generally the gravelly bed of the river, but 
sometimes cross the akres for a considerable dis- 
tance, especially towards the end of the day’s 
journey, which terminates at 4.15, on the right 
bank, at the Khan of Kotovazdhi*, so called as 
having been built by the inhabitants of a village of 
that name in the neighbouring mountain, who are 


1 Λιμπώχοβος. but is separated from the terri- 
3 Μαλακάσσι. One of the _ tory of this village by the whole 
four sub-districts into which of Métzovo. 
the rural district of Ioannina is > Korofa Zou 
divided bears the same name, 


Ix. | THESSALIA. 417 


bound to keep the building in repair, and to see 
that it is furnished with provisions and a khanji to 
sell them. 

Aly Pasha has caused khans to be established in 
the same manner, at intervals of about an hour 
along the whole route from Ioannina to Trikkala, 
but only those of Dhrysko, Tria Khania, Malakassi, 
and Kotovazdhi, have chambers for travellers of 
the higher classes. From Kotovazdhi there is a 
route of six hours to Kalarytes, leaving Khaliki 
at no great distance to the right. The river of 
Kotovazdhi receives streams from Vendista and 
Kastania’, two large villages situated among woods 
of chestnut. Between the khans of Malakassi and 
Kotovazdhi a tributary joins the Salamvria from 
the northward, having its origin in the ridges to- 
wards Miliés, from the opposite face of which the 
waters flow to the Venetiko of Grevena. To the 
right of our road were the villages of Labovo, 
K6ékkino-lithari, and Gletjadhes’: to the left that 
of Striniza*®, nearly opposite to Labovo. All these 
places stand at the head of sloping vineyards and 
corn-fields. 

Nov. 15.—At 8 we continue to follow the bed 
of the river from the Khan of Kotovazdhi, but 
sometimes passing through narrow meadows on its 
bank, or among plane trees which began to border 
_ the stream a little above the khan. The vale widens 
gradually. At 8.30 we cross a branch of the river 
flowing from the mountains on the right, and at 


1 Bevdiora or Βεντίστα, Καστανια. 

* Λάμποβος, Κόκκινο-λιθάρι, Γλετζάδες. 
ὃ Στρούνιζα. 

VOL. F: Ee 


418 THESSALIA. | CHAP. 


9.20 a larger from Klinovo. Here the main valley 
is about a mile in breadth. The opening of the 
river of Klinovo admits a view of a great branch 
of Pindus which follows a direction nearly parallel 
to the course of the Penews. This mountain is 
known by the name of Aspropotamitiko, as being 
contained in the district of Aspropdétamo, and 
as falling on the opposite side to the river so 
called: it is now deeply covered with snow. At 
9.40, being near the foot of the right-hand hills, 
we have, at the distance of half a mile on the left, 
the junction of the Salamvria, with a stream of 
almost equal magnitude flowing from the north- 
ward, and from the Trikkaline sub-district of Krat- 
zova. Soon afterwards we cross a tributary from 
the right. From the left bank of the Kratzova 
branch rises a range of hills of a secondary alti- 
tude, which terminate towards the valley of the 
Peneius, in the perpendicular rocks named the 
Metéora', upon which are built the monasteries 
called τά μοναστήρια τοῦ Πίνδου. At 10.10, after 
having turned a root of the mountain to the right ἢ 
where the valley changes its direction to the south, 
a part of the plain of Trikkala becomes visible : 
the plane trees still continue. At 10.20, the prin- 
cipal monastery or Metéora, individually so called, 
is on a high rock to the left, distant two or three 
miles, and another midway on a point half as high 
as the former. After having passed over a root of 
the mountain, we cross to the left bank of the river 
and arrive in sight of the Castle of Trikkala, then 


1 ra Meréwoa. 


IX. | THESSALIA. 419 


turning to the left of the direct road leading to 
that place, arrive in ten minutes more, at 11 a.m., 
at Kalabaka, where I am lodged im the house of 
a Kalarytiote silversmith. 

Kalabaka, by the Greeks called Stagts, in the 
nominative Staghi', is situated on the south-eastern 
side, and immediately at the foot of a perpen- 
dicular precipice, which is five or six hundred feet 
high, and of an uniform surface from top to bot- 
tom, but is divided into two parts by a deep ver- 
tical fissure, affording a narrow passage from the 
town to the village of Kastraki, and the monasteries 
of the Metéora. The cleft widens towards the top, 
and gives the rock of Kalabaka a bicipital appear- 
ance at a distance. There is a third precipitous 
summit to the eastward, called the mountain of 
‘Aio Stéfano, from a convent of Saint Stephen 
which stands on the summit. The town is spread 
over the upper part of a long slope covered with 
mulberry trees, which declines very gently to the 
river Salamvria, and commands a fine view of the 
plain of Trikkala, beyond which appear the heights 
of ‘Agrafa, and behind them the summits of Mount 
(ita, entirely covered with snow. To the left of 
the plain rise the heights behind Trikkala, over 
which another snowy mountain is seen, probably 
Othrys. At 2 miles below Kalabaka, the Salam- 
vria, after having encircled the slope which de- 
scends from the town, makes a sudden turn to the 
south, towards the foot of the mountain of Κόι- 
jaka, which borders the plain to the westward, 


* Σταγοὶ, στοὺς Σταγούς. 
Ee 2 


420 THESSALIA. [ CHAP. 


and after a course of six or eight miles in that 
direction, sweeps again in a graceful curve towards 
Trikkala. A wide gravelly uncultivable space on 
either side the river, caused by its inundations, is 
characteristic of the ποταμόκλυστος Θετταλία ', but it 
is common to the rivers in general of the plains 
of Greece, and may be said to be injurious both 
to agriculture and to picturesque effect. Although 
Kalabaka belongs to the Liva or government of 
Trikkala, its public revenue is at present a 
separate mukata in the hands of Vely Pasha, 
whose agent is the only Turk residing in the 
place. The Pasha receives 30 purses a year; the 
other contributions, including the local expences 
of the district, such as konaks, support of Albanian 
troops, &c. amount to 20 more. This is paid 
almost entirely by about 120 houses, the rest, to 
the number of 30 or 40, being wretched cottages. 
The house of Kyr lanaki, the Hodja-bashi, is 
large, and there are some others which indicate 
former opulence, but the place has been much 
injured of late by robbers, or by the Albanians 
sent in pursuit of them. The mulberry plantations 
still produce 12 or 15 fortomata of silk per annum, 
each fortoma being 100 okes. The territory of 
Trikkala produces about 60 fortomata. Stagi 
was formerly a metropolitan see, but is now only 
a poor bishopric of the province of Larissa. The 
cathedral, which is not large, was built about the 
year 1300 by the Emperor Andronicus Palzolo- 
gus, aS appears by an inscription on one of the 
1 Ταῦτα δ᾽ ἐστὶ ra μέσα τῆς pa, πλὴν ὅση ποταμόκλυστός 
Θετταλίας εὐδαιμονεστάτη χώ- ἐστιν.---ίγαρο, p. 430. 


IX. | THESSALIA. 42] 


walls of the church. It has a large pulpit of stone 
‘in the centre, and is supported by columns of a 
coarse white marble. Below the altar is a small 
column of verd-antique. All these columns are 
held to be θαυματούργαις, and distil water on the 
feast of the saint to whom the church is dedicated. 
Adjoining to the church is the humble palace of 
the bishop τῶν Σταγῶν, who is now at Constan- 
tinople. 

That Stagds stands on the site of an ancient 
city, appears from many indications. On the 
slope below the town are some massy foundations 
of Hellenic walls, and ancient sepulchres are found 
occasionally in the vineyards in the same direc- 
tion. In the town several wrought blocks are 
observable in the walls of the churches and pri- 
vate houses. There is an inscribed marble in the 
outer wall of the episcopal church, and two others 
at a fountain at the church of St. Prodromus. 
The first of these monuments (No. 7) records the 
liberation of some slaves, and contains, together 
with their names, those of the purveyor’, and 
some other officer, under whom the manumission 
took place. But one of the inscriptions at the foun- 
tain (No. 6) is of more importance, and comes 
most opportunely in aid of the ancient authors, to 
resolve many historic and geographic uncertain- 
ties. It is cut in large but much-worn letters on 
a plain squared stone, and attests that the city of 
the Aiginienses had honoured the emperors Seve- 
rus and Antoninus (Caracalla). Stagis therefore 


* ταμίας: 


422 THESSALIA. [ CHAP. 


stands on the site of Aiginium, a fact in perfect 
conformity with Strabo, from whom we learn that 
Aiginium was in the country of the Tymphei, and 
that it confined on Tricca’, for Mount Tymphe is 
sufficiently identified with the summits near Mét- 
zovo, by its having contained the sources of the 
Arachthus* ; and Stagis lies exactly between the 
Zygoés of Métzovo and Trikkala. The singular 
situation of the place, fortified on two sides by 
perpendicular precipices, accords also with the 
mention of Ai‘ginium by Livy, who relates, that 
when the consul Quinctius entered Thessaly after 
the battle at the Aoi Stena, he first took Phaloria, 
and then advanced against Aiginium, but that 
finding it next to impregnable, he was deterred 
from even attempting to besiege it, and turned 
towards Gomphi’. 

The importance of Aiginium is shown on other 
occasions in ancient history. Notwithstanding its 
strength, it was taken by the Athamanes, when 
they were in alliance with Antiochus against the 
Romans, but was soon afterwards recovered by 
the united forces of Bebius and Philip*. It was 
given up to plunder by L. Aimilius Paullus for 
having refused to open its gates after the battle of 
Pydna*. But perhaps the most interesting illus- 
tration which the inscription of Kalabaka affords, 


1 Αἰγένιον δὲ Τυμφαίων, 5 Liv. 1. 82, ο. 15. 
ὅμορον Αἰθικίᾳ καὶ Τρίκκῃ.-τ-- * Id. L 36, ¢, 13. 
Strabo, p. 327. 5 Id. 1. 44, c. 46; L. 45, 


? δΑραχθος ποταμὸς, apxo- ο. 27. 
μενος ἐκ Τύμφης ὄρους καὶ τῆς 
παρωραίας. ---δίταθο, p. 325. 


IX. | THESSALIA. 423 


is that of the march of Julius Cesar, in his way 
from Illyria to Pharsalia. A¢ginium, which he 
describes as objectum oppositumque Thessahe, was 
the place where he was met by the forces under 
Domitius, coming from Heraclia of Lyncestis’. It 
was from Apollonia that Cesar had begun his 
march into Thessaly ; his route therefore probably 
followed the Aous and its branch, the modern 
Dryno, traversing from thence the plain of Ioan- 
nina, and crossing the Pindus by the pass of 
Métzovo, while Domitius, moving from Heraclia, 
which was near the modern Bitdlia, returned to 
the vale of the Vistritza, or Haliacmon, where he 
had been opposed to Scipio previously to his 
movement upon Heraclia, and following that val- 
ley to Grevena, from thence crossed the heights 
which separate it from the Upper Thessalan plain, 
in which Kalabaka and Trikkala are situated. 
Scipio about the same time marched from the 
Haliacmon to Larissa, probably by the modern 
Sérvia and Elasséna, in order to effect a junction 
with Pompey, who from Dyrrhachium had crossed 
Mount Candavia to Lyncestis, from whence, we 
may suppose his route to have been through Per- 
thebia and the Larissa. 

It is proper to observe, that besides Cesar’s 
error as to Heraclia, to which 1 have before advert- 
ed’, the text is manifestly wrong in describing his 
march as being through Epirus and Acarnania ; for 
the latter province lay very wide of his route to the 


* Ceesar de B. C.1. 3, c. 79.  cestis. See p. 315 of this 
* Naming it Heraclia Sin- volume. 
tica instead of Heraclia Lyn- 


424 THESSALIA. [ CHAP. 


right. The latter name ought evidently, therefore, 
to be Athamania; for though in strictness Ceesar’s 
line of march only passed along the northern bor- 
ders of Athamania, it is easy to conceive that the 
importance which the latter district had assumed 
about the time of the earlier wars of the Romans 
in this country, may have caused the name to be 
applied, especially among the Romans themselves, 
to a larger portion of the mountains adjacent to 
the south-eastern part of Thessaly, than it had ori- 
ginally included. As the inscription of Stagis 
gives to the emperors the titles Parthici, Arabici, 
Adiabenici, its date was subsequent to A.D. 201, 
the year of the expedition of Severus into the 
East. 

Nov. 16.—This morning at 8.30, descending 
through the mulberry plantations, we rejoin, in 
less than twenty minutes, the direct road from 
Joannina to Trikkala. On looking back toward 
Kalabaka, the rock of Aio Stéfano appears higher 
than the double summit immediately behind the 
town. To our left, as we proceed, low hills skirt 
the plain, and thus continue all the way to Trik- 
kala, beyond which they trend more easterly ; and 
the mountains on the opposite side having also a 
direction more southerly than before, the plain 
becomes suddenly much wider. Our road is 
seldom more than half a mile distant from the 
hills on the left. In a little κόλπος, or retired 
plain, at about a quarter of the distance to Trik- . 
kala, stands Koyéltzi, and in another, at half way, 
Voivéda, both villages of the district of Trikkala. 
The land is a light and light-coloured mould, now 


IX. | THESSALIA. 425 


under the plough, after having produced a crop of 
kalambokki. Cars are used like those of the 
plain of Grevena, but the trucks, or solid wheels 
upon which they turn, are higher. These trucks 
are thicker in the centre than at the edge, which 
is shod with iron: the car is drawn by two oxen, 
and moves, without creaking and bending, from 
one side to another, like those of Berat and the 
Mizakia. The plough-share is a flat 
triangular piece of iron, like the --- 
head of a spear. As we approach ai | 
Trikkala, many large elms and 

planes are observable towards the 

river, which is two or three miles to 

the right. We crossed a torrent 

issuing from the mountains at Voi- 

déva; and another half an hour short of Trikkala, ἡ 
which passes through the town, and contains only 

pools of water in the deepest parts, with little or 

no current, though in the rainy season it would 

seem to be of a different character, as the road 

crosses it by a large stone bridge. It is probably 

the ancient Lethzus'. 

At the entrance of the town stands a new serai 
of Aly Pasha. Here we overtake a caravan of 
horses, mules, and asses, in number about two 
hundred, laden with the women, children, and 
household gear of Gramista on their road to Ar- 
myro. Gramista, like several other towns on the 
ridge of Pindus, consists chiefly of ἀγωγιάταις and 
βοσκοὶ, or in the Turko-Greek dialect of Thessaly, 


—— 


* Strabo, p. 647. 


426 THESSALTA. ) [ CHAP. 


κερατζίδες and τζουμπάνιδες ; that is to say, carriers 
and shepherds, very few of whom remain in the 
mountain in the winter. The carriers, from the 
nature of their employment, are frequently absent 
from home at all times of the year, the shepherds 
proceed constantly in the winter to their pastures 
in the plains: so that in that season the villages 
in the mountains are almost deserted. Each vil- 
lage has its particular place of resort, where the 
Mukatesi levies a capitation upon the cattle for the 
right of pasture. . 

The castle of Trikkala occupies a hill projecting 
from the last falls of the mountain of Khassia ', and 
is commanded by one of those heights at no great 
distance. It is a structure apparently of the middle 
ages, which has been frequently repaired. It is 
of considerable extent, and has a small keep at 
the summit which commands a noble view of the 
great plain of Upper Thessaly, from Stagis to 
Maskoluri, backed by the mountains of Kotjaka 
and ‘Agrafa. These two great ridges are sepa- 
rated only from each other by a klisira, or pass, 
called? the Gates of Trikkala, where are two vil- 
lages named Portes, standing in the pass. To the 
left of this remarkable feature of the view, the 
mountains of ‘Agrafa occupy near ninety degrees 
of the horizon. A low projection of them imme- 
diately opposite to Trikkala, and nearly due south 
of it, is crowned with a village and ruined castle 
named Fanari. 


* Χασσιὰ, vulgarly pro- 5 at πόρταις τῶν Τρικκάλων. 
nounced Khasha. 


Ix. | THESSALIA. 427 


The town of Trikkala covers the slope and plain 
on the southern and eastern sides of the castle, 
and is said to contain between twelve and fifteen 
hundred families, a great part of whom live in 
miserable cottages. The houses are all built of 
sun-baked bricks, and have a poor appearance 
compared with those of Ioannina, where in all the 
larger the lower half of the wall is of stone. 
Though Trikkala has rapidly declined since it has 
been governed by Alf Pasha, it is still one of the 
largest towns in Greece, has seven or eight 
mosques, more than as many churches, two syna- 
gogues, a well furnished bazar, and a market on 
Sundays, much frequented from the surrounding 
country. 

A large proportion of the houses, although built 
by and belonging to Turks, are hired and inhabited 
by Greeks; so that the Christian population ex- 
ceeds the Turkish. This has arisen from the con- 
duct of Aly Pasha towards the Turks, whose lands 
he has obtained from some by purchase at a cheap 
rate, because their extravagance and debts had re- 
duced them to that necessity, and from others by 
his accustomed modes of fraud or tyranny ; others 
having been unable to bear their share of the ex- 
pences caused by the wars of the Vezir, the visits 
of himself and his sons, the passage of Albanian 
troops, and those arbitrary demands which he 
makes at intervals, have either sold their property 
to live elsewhere, or have removed into some vil- 
lage and let their town-houses in apartments. The 
post is another heavy tax on such a thoroughfare 
as Trikkala, and the Menzilji, or postmaster, is 


428 THESSALIA. [ CHAP. 


one of the leading men in the place. He contracts 
to keep one hundred and fifty horses for two hun- 
dred purses a year. An old inhabitant tells me, 
that he remembers when it was done for six 
purses. 

In one of his late visits to this place, Aly carried 
away with him a Trikkaline' Greek, whom he 
imagined rich, and put him in prison at loannina, 
signifying to him that the price of his liberation 
was two hundred purses. After two years’ confine- 
ment, the man escaped and went to Adrianople, 
whence he immediately wrote to his son at Trik- 
kala to join him. But the Vezir had been before- 
hand with him, and had already caused the son 
to occupy the father’s place in the prison. After 
a long bargaining, fifty purses was agreed to by 
the Vezir as the lowest price of the son’s liberty. 
The father had not so much; but after selling his 
house, two or three small farms, and some vine- 
yards, in short, the whole property of the family, 
he collected thirty-six purses, which were paid to 
the Vezir, who, however, still kept his prisoner 
confined, until fully convinced that he had not the 
means of completing the fifty purses. The father, 
meantime, died at Adrianople, and the son is now 
in poverty at Trikkala. Aly refused to accept the 
property in house and lands from the son in full of 
his demand, but obliged the young man to sell 
them himself; purchased them secretly, and then 
received back the purchase-money from his vic 
tim. 


* Τρικκαλινός. 


IX. | THESSALIA. 429 


The bishop of Trikkala, a man of some curiosity 
and information, supposes Stagus to be the site of 
the Ithome of Homer, judging so with great ap- 
pearance of reason, from the poet’s epithet κλωμα- 
κόεσσα ; but Ithome still retained its name in the 
time of Strabo; and his description of the site will 
not agree with that of Stagus. The bishop was of 
course ignorant of the decisive inscription con- 
taining the words Πόλις Αἰγινιέίων. He informs me, 
that there are some remains of a Hellenic town 
or fortress at Ardham, a village two hours from 
Trikkala to the north-west, in the Khassia hills, 
where also are the sources of the lazy stream, 
which flows through Trikkala. He is rather scan- 
dalized at my having passed without visiting the 
Metéora, which he qualifies as’ royal and heaven- 
built works. 

The only traces I can find of the ancient Tricca 
are some small remains of Hellenic masonry, form- 
ing part of the wall of the castle, and some squared 
blocks of stone of the same ages dispersed in dif- 
ferent parts of the town. On the summit of the 
hill behind the castle stands part of the shaft of a 
column one foot eight inches in diameter, tapering 
like the Doric, but not fluted. It is fixed with the 
smaller end in the ground, and is not, therefore, 
in its original position. There is another similar 
column in an adjoining Turkish cemetery. They 
seem too small to have belonged to the Asclepium 
of Tricca ; for Aisculapius having been an object 


Zoya βασιλικὰ καὶ ϑεόκτιστα. 


430 THESSALIA. [CIIAP. 


of peculiar veneration as a native deity, whose sons 
conducted the Triccei to Troy: his temple was 
probably one of the chief ornaments of the city. 
Some remains of it may, perhaps, be enve- 
loped in the buildings of the modern town, or 
buried under the accumulated ruins and rubbish 
of ages. Strabo describes it as the most ancient 
and illustrious of all the temples of Aisculapius’, 
and as the constant resort of invalids, whose cures 
were there recorded as in his temples of Cos and 
Epidaurus ’. 

Noy. 18.—At 10 a.m. we proceed from Trikkala 
on the road to Larissa, and at the eastern extremity 
of the town pass by the serai of Vely Pasha, which, 
although built only a very few years ago, is already 
in such a dilapidated state, that the window-shut- 
ters are dropping off their hinges into the street. 
The road is dry and even dusty; the hills of 
Khassia are at no great distance on the left: to 
the right the plain extends for twelve or fifteen 
miles to the foot of the lower heights of 'Agrafa, 
behind which the central ridges which connect 
Pindus with Cita, exhibit their majestic summits 
covered deeply with snow. At 11.40 we halt to 
dine at the little village of Kurbali: the men are 
all absent with their flocks, but we are received by 
the women without fear—one of the favourable 
traits of Aly’s government. A quarter of an hour 
beyond Kurbali, a hill, one mile and a half to the 


1 At ἴε ΓΝ ~ 9 ~ wey r . + die -4 , 
τὸ ἱερὸν Tov ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ TO ἀρχαιότατον Kal ἐπιφανέστατον. 


—Strabo, p. 437. 
7 Id. p. 374. 


Ix. | THESSALIA. 431 


left, which is one of the extreme points of the 
mountains of Khassia, and is connected with the 
heights behind Trikkala, is surrounded by Hellenic 
walls of considerable extent. A church crowns 
the summit, and there is another in ruins at the 
foot of the hill. The place is called Kardhiki, 
and still gives title to one of the suffragan bishop- 
rics of the province of Larissa. In the interval 
between our road and the ruins is a small lake, 
which yields an abundance of fish. 

An opening in the hills, not seen from Trikkala, 
now discovers itself, through which the Salamvria 
flows, and the northern part of Mount Peliwm makes 
its appearance. Our road, on turning towards the 
opening, approaches the hills on the left, and at 2 
brings us to Kolokotd, a small village at the foot 
of a rocky insulated height not far from the hills, 
and about half an hour distant from the left bank 
of the Pencius. Immediately above the village 
are some remains of a Hellenic wall of rude and 
antique construction, which inclosed only the sum- 
mit of the hill, together with a small space down 
the side. On the top of all is a modern tower in 
ruins. A little before Kolokot6 our road touched 
the bank of the small stream which flows through 
Trikkala: it is narrow, in most parts deep, and 
moves so slowly that the current is visible only in 
particular places. From Kolokoté we pass over a 
paved road, between the rocky height of the Paled- 
kastro and a marsh on the right, which is fed by 
some springs issuing from under the rocks, and 
then cross a bay or recess of the plain between 
the hill of Kolokoté and those of the district 

i2 


432 THESSALIA. [CHAP. 


of Khassia. At 3.10 Great and Little Tjigotd, or 
Tyighioti, or Tjaidti', are on the left; and to the 
northward of the latter Grisano, or Gritziano’, above 
which are a large church, and the ruined walls of 
a considerable town, apparently of the time of the 
Byzantine empire. To the right, at the same 
time, a round insulated hill, situated at about the 
same distance from the right bank of the Salam- 
vria as Tzighioti is from the left, is rendered very 
conspicuous by the ruined walls of a large Hellenic 
city inclosing its summit and face. 

We now come in sight of Zarko, situated, like 
Tzighidti, just within a projection of the heights 
which here form with other hills on the opposite 
side of the Salamvria a strait through which the 
river makes its way towards Larissa. Having 
crossed the plain which extends to the left to Gri- 
sano and the hills of Khassia, we arrive at 3.45 at 
Zarko, a town of 350 houses, built of a coarse gra- 
nite from the adjacent hills, and which forms with 
Tjighidti an agalik of Mukhtar Pasha, who, besides 
the royal revenue of the two villages, receives an 
annual contribution as an exemption from the 
quartering of Albanian soldiers. For the accom- 
modation of Tatars, or persons travelling with im- 
perial firmahns, or with buyurdis of Aly or Mukh- 
tar, the proestos has built two apartments adjoining 
his house, in one of which I take up my abode for 
the night. The proestos himself is now in prison 
at Ioannina, whither he was carried by Aly when 


1 Τζιγοτὸς, Τζιγότι, Τζαϊότι. 2 Τρίσανος, Τριτζιάνος. 


1X. | THESSALIA. 433 


this primate had allowed the thieves to infest the 
country around Zarko, and had been on good terms 
with them. Zarko is chiefly noted for its cotton, 
which in good years produces 1000 fortomata of 
picked cotton, in a state fit for spinning. Each 
fortoma is of twenty okes, and requires ninety- 
three okes of cotton from the field. Notwithstand- 
ing the fertility of these plains, cultivation is con- 
fined to the vicinity of the villages ; the remainder 
supplies only winter pasture to sheep and cattle. 
Cotton is almost the only agricultural production 
of this place, and a bad cotton-year is starvation to 
Zarko. It is the ordinary residence of the Bishop 
of Kardhiki', who is now at Constantinople. 

Noy. 19.—At 8.30 we begin to turn the pomt 
of the mountain of Zarko, and entering the boghaz 
or strait already mentioned, through which the 
Salamyria flows, arrive in twenty minutes upon the 
bank of the river. The water being now low, and 
fordable in many places, we leave on the right the 
πόρος, Where at other times the river is passed by a 
boat, and continue to follow the left bank. At 9.45 
there is an interval of only a mile and a half between 
the hills on either side. Here a rocky advanced 
height on the right bank preserves the ruins of a 
Hellenic wall, which incloses the summit together 
with the slope towards the river, and contains within 
the ancient inclosure some remains of a smaller and 
more modern castle. Ten minutes farther, we ford 
the Salamvria, which flows with a slow current 
over a bed formed of a mixture of mould and 
fine sand, resembling the deposit of the Nile; the 

* 6 Καρδικίου. 


VOL. T. Ff 


434 THESSALIA. [CHAP. 


depth in the deepest part is about four feet. But the 
dry autumn has made the river lower and less rapid 
than usual. In proceeding, the village of Alifaka 
is a mile on the right, not far from the foot of the 
height of the Paledkastro, from whence the- hills 
on that side take a southerly direction. We now 
cross the plain to Larissa, along the chord of a 
large arch formed by the Salamvria: the river 
however does not, throughout this distance, flow 
through the great plain, but first passes in a north- 
erly direction through a valley included between a 
continuation of the Zarko range of hills, and a 
rocky ridge on the opposite bank, which forms the 
boundary of the plain of Larissa to the westward. 
The river then emerges into the plain two hours to 
the westward of Larissa, at a narrow opening be- 
tween the northern extremity of the last-mentioned 
ridge and the southern end of a root of Mount 
Olympus, at the foot of which stands Tarnovo, two 
hours to the north-eastward of the opening. After 
passing the city, the river makes a remarkable 
turn to the northward before it arrives at Tempe. 
As soon as we had passed the opening of Alifaka, 
Olympus, Ossa, and Pelium, were displayed before 
us in all their magnificence. Ossa, with its woody 
slopes and its conical peak now deeply covered 
with snow, is one of the most beautiful mountains 
in Greece, and is well contrasted in character with 
the broad majesty of its neighbour. The lower 
sides of Olympus are well wooded, but the summit 
presents a wide extent of a bare light-coloured 
rock, which has very little snow on this side, 
though it is evidently the highest of the mountains 


TX. | THESSALIA. 435 


which surround Thessaly, and probably the highest 
in Greece. 

From the ford of Alifaka, as far as Thumai, we 
cross an uncultivated plain, with a soil resembling 
that of Egypt. Thumai is on the rise of a low 
ridge which projects into the plain from the hills 
on the right. It consists of twenty or thirty families, 
with one Turkish house. Having halted here from 
10.50 to 12.40, we cross a slight elevation, upon 
which are two or three other small tjiftlik villages, 
and descend again into the lowest level where the 
town of Larissa', surmounted by more than twenty 
minarets, displays itself in front. Having traversed 
some gardens and vineyards, where the Salamvria 
flows at a small distance on the left, we enter the 
town at 2.45, and at 3 arrive at the serai or παλάτι 
of the metropolitan bishop, situated on the right 
bank of the Peneius.. The palace, together with the 
adjoining cathedral, which is remarkable neither 
for its size or decorations, is inclosed by a wall, 
serving in some measure as a protection from 
Turkish insult. The upper story commands a noble 
view of the Larisse campus opme, surrounded by 
Ossa, Olympus, and the Perrhebian hills. Imme- 
diately above the metropolis, the river is crossed 
by a bridge of nine arches, 300 feet in length, 
faced with large squared stones, and having a road- 


* The vulgar sound, in con- of the Greek and Roman au- 
sequence of the position of the thors, though not that of coins 
accent, is Larsa, but I have and inscriptions, which is Ad- 
followed the modern orthogra- oa, or Λάρεισα. 
phy, which is the same as that 

Ff2 


436 THESSALIA. | CHAP. 


way which, very unlike that of the narrow Albanian 
bridges, is wide enough for two carriages: the piers 
which terminate below in spurs, are pierced with 
Saracenic arches, curved and pointed. 

Larissa, though standing in the lowest part of 
the plain, and subject to excessive heat in summer, 
is not considered unhealthy, which is ascribed to 
its being unconfined by neighbouring mountains, 
and therefore always well ventilated; neverthe- 
less, as in the generality of Greek towns, the 
autumn is seldom unattended with some degree of 
sickness and mortality. Although the plain im- 
mediately around is as dry and dusty in the sum- 
mer months as Egypt in June, there is a marshy 
space to the north-east, caused by an inundation 
from the river in winter, where the water is never 
quite absorbed by the sun. The exhalations from 
thence, and the cold air which descends at night 
from the mountains, can hardly fail to produce 
some degree of disease, when after the termination 
of the Etesian breezes, that stagnation of the atmo- 
sphere prevails, which throughout Greece is pre- 
valent from the pn α of September to the 
autumnal rains. 

Since we have crossed the ΓΝ the weather 
has been perfectly serene, with a slight breeze from 
the north or north-east, and a sharp frost every 
night, yielding at an early hour to the power of 
the sun. While deluges were falling on the western 
side of that chain of mountains, Thessaly was suf- 
fering from drought, and the land is now so parched 
that the peasants cannot sow: it is admitted, how- 
ever, that this is an unusual occurrence, and that in 


Ix. | THESSALIA. 437 


general there is a sufficiency of moisture to make 
the light rich mould of Thessaly the most produc- 
tive soil in Greece. A beautiful autumnal season 
generally follows the equinoctial rains, and con- 
tinues with short intermissions to the end of the 
year, while in Epirus the same kind of weather 
occurs only at intervals, which after the beginning 
of November are both short and rare. The soft- 
ness of the Zhessahan climate, compared with that 
of Epirus, seems to have had its effect upon the 
character of the inhabitants, who are more cheerful 
and civil than those to the west of the Pindus, 
although living in the midst of poverty and the 
most grinding oppression. 

Finding the Mitrdpoli too much like a Turkish 
kiosk for the present season, and that the inmates, 
although bearing the sounding titles of πρωτοσύνκελ- 
λος, οἰκονόμος, and ἱεροδιάκονος, are too ignorant of 
every thing beyond their walls to afford much 
assistance to my inquiries, I procure, not without 
some difficulty, an apartment at the house of 
Kyr P., a medical practitioner. But I have reason 
to regret the change of lodging. Though a native 
of the place, my host knows very little about it, 
and thinks only of turning my occupation of his 
apartment to his own benefit. He proceeds in this 
manner: according to custom, the town undertakes 
to entertain the Vezir’s musafir, and to supply him 
with a taim of meat, bread, wood, oil, and candles. 
The iatros having taken this duty upon himself, 
soon begins to complain of the extreme difficulty of 
obtaining such commodities (in Larissa of all places 
in Greece), and gives various ingenious reasons 

VOL. I. 23 — 


438 THESSALIA. [ CHAP. 


for it, until at length, to avoid starvation, we are 
obliged to make our own purchases, and to enter- 
tain our entertainer and his whole family, who will 
make his own charges as soon as I am gone, when 
there will no longer be any possibility of a refer- 
ence for the truth of them. Among the great 
number of petty inconveniences, which put the 
traveller’s patience to trial in these countries, the 
unavoidable necessity of contributing occasionally 
to the misery of the lower classes, and of abetting 
the oppression and roguery of the higher, is that 
which is most mortifying. Last winter Kyr A., 
the hodja-bashi of Ioannina, after starving my 
friend M. and his suite for several days, charged 
the town at the rate of sixty piastres a day for their 
maintenance, 

Mr. P. asserts, that there are 8000 Turkish fami- 
lies in Larissa, instead of which probably they do 
not much exceed half that number. There are 300 
or 400 Jewish houses, some of which are said to be 
among the richest of European Turkey, and about 
400 Greek. Formerly, there were many Armenian 
families, but the greater part have had the wisdom 
to withdraw to places where the Christians can 
pursue their trades in greater security. The Arme- 
nians are the most prudent, crafty, and knowing, 
of all the Ghiaurs of the Levant, and are gene- 
rally to be found in the best situations. They are 
industrious, always intent on gain, and far more 
profound knaves than the Greeks, whose flighty 
and inconstant tempers render it difficult for them 
to attend to any fixed plans, and who, amidst all 
their roguery and deceit, are capable of liberal and 


IX. | THESSALIA. 439 


disinterested actions, and have a curiosity and 
thirst for mental improvement, which is very rarely 
found among the Armenians of Turkey. 

Nov. 20.—Larissa, like the generality of the 
sites of Greece, which have been continually in- 
habited, preserves few remains of Hellenic times. 
The circumference is less than three miles, one 
fourth of which is contiguous to the river, on the 
opposite bank of which there is a grove of elms 
and white poplars. The remainder of the town 15 
surrounded by hillocks, and at intervals by large 
spaces covered with Turkish tomb-stones. Among 
these cemeteries is found almost all that now re- 
mains above ground of the ancient Larissa, con- 
sisting of plain quadrangular stones, fragments of 
columns mostly fluted, and a great number of 
ancient cippi and sepulchral stele, all now serving 
for Turkish tomb-stones. In many instances a 
sepulchral stone with a Greek inscription has been 
placed at the head of.a Turkish grave, without any 
Turkish inscription now apparent, so that many a 
Mehmét or Mustafa is reposing under the name of 
an Aristomachus or Cassander. It would be tedi- 
ous to examine thoroughly all the burying grounds, 
but a person who had the patience, and the good 
fortune to do so without insult, for the Turks of 
Larissa are very insolent, might possibly find some- 
thing interesting among the inscriptions. Almost 
all those I saw were simple μνήματα. In the wall of 
the metropolitan church is a register of the names 
of certain freed men and women, who had each paid 
a stater to the city upon the occasion of their liber- 
ation. The marble is incomplete, and contains 


440 THESSALIA. [CHAP. 


only the names of seven persons who had been the 
slaves of one Marcus Afrius'. 

Larissa is the most Ottoman town in Greece to 
the southward of Saloniki, having been the chief 
settlement of the Turks ever since the conquest of 
this part of the country previously to that of Con- 
stantinople. It then received the name of Yeni- 
shehér, which is still the official appellation. 
When Mahomet IV. was engaged in the siege of 
Candia, he made this place his residence, and 
here Dr. Brown, an English traveller, found him 
in the year 1669. The doctor relates, that the 
Sultan encamped during a part of that summer 
upon Mount Olympus, in order to avoid the heat 
and malaria of Larissa, but that the cold of the 
mountain was fatal to many of his followers. As 
an instance of the daring character of Mahomet, 
Brown states, that he killed one of his finest horses 
in an attempt to ride up the peak of Kissavo’, (the 
summit of Ossa.) Although Yenishehér, in civil 
and military arrangement, is subordinate to Tir- 
hala (Trikkala), which gives name to a liva or 
district of the eyalét or province of Rumili, it has 
like many other places in Turkey, a jurisdiction 
separate from its district, the judicial and ecclesias- 
tical affairs being in the hands of a Molla, who is 


'’Avyaby τὐχῆ. Παρὰ Aov- 
κίου Tur tov ᾽Ονησίμου τοῦ ταμίου 
τῆς πόλεως τὴν δευτέραν ἑξά- 
μήνον, ἐνεγράφθη ἹἹπποκρατίδῃ, 
ἀναγραφὴ 
δεδωκότων τοὺς στατήρας τῇ 
πόλει. Μάρκου ᾿Αφρίου. Τελέσ- 
φορος, ᾿Αγαθὴ, 


ἀπελευθερωθέντων, 


7 > 
Κάσσανδρα, 


Ἡρακλέων, Χάριτα, Στράτων, 
ἸΙούκουνδα. --- V. Inscription 
Νο, 18. , 

* The doctor seems to have 
mistaken Kissavo for a part of 
Olympus; it is possible, there- 
fore, that Mahomet’s camp may 
have been upon Ossa. 


Ix. | THESSALIA. 44] 


appointed like the pashas every year at the Kurban 
Bairam, and whose maintenance being assigned 
upon a certain portion of the liva of Trikkala, has 
given to that portion the name of the Mollalik. The 
civil power at Larissa is divided among several rich 
Beys styled the Ayans: the chief is Abdim, who pos- 
sessing a large portion of the Pelasgic plain, has no 
reason to envy the precarious fortune of any vezir in 
the empire. There are several other Turks here 
with good landed properties, but in general their 
expences in arms, horses, furniture, and women, 
oblige them in a few years to cheat the Christian or 
Jewish trader, or to oppress the farmer so much by 
forced contributions of produce, that he is obliged to 
migrate elsewhere, and to leave the estate unpro- 
ductive, for want of cultivation. In the tyiftliks of 
the surrounding plains the peasant generally re- 
ceives half the crop for his labour, he supplying 
the seed, but the farming-stock belonging to the 
landlord. In any other country this would leave 
enough for the farmer; but such is the conduct of 
the Turks, that the Greeks are continually mi- 
grating, chiefly to the districts of Jona, governed 
by the family of Kara-osman-ogli ; in return, 
Turkish peasants from Asia Minor have settled on 
some of the Larisseean farms, and have been able 
to live better than the Greeks, because they are 
exempt from the kharat], and some impositions 
to which the Greeks alone are liable. Some of 
the grievances to which both the townsmen and 
peasants are subject are owing to the Vezir Aly, 
who, as Pasha of Trikkala and Superintendant of 
the Dervents, considers himself privileged fre- 


442 THESSALIA. [CHAP. 


quently to visit Larissa, when it is well understood 
that he expects a large gratuity, and will not de- 
part without it. He generally finds some excuse 
also for carrying away with him some Jew or 
Greek, to be kept in prison until he has extorted 
a sum of money from him. The Greeks afford 
him little plunder, being generally poor. The 
most flourishing trade seems to be that of phy- 
sician, of whom there are several at Larissa; at 
Trikkala, the favourite abode of Aisculapius, there 
was not one. The expression ἐκαλάσθηκε ὃ κόσμος, 
(the world is ruined), so common all over Greece, 
is repeated here loudly, not less by the Turks 
than by the Greeks. They allude to the increas- 
ing poverty, and to the excessive rise in the price 
of provision, and every necessary of life within 
the last few years, which has been the ruin of 
many families. Its causes are the necessities of 
the Porte, the progressive debasement of the cur- 
rency, the extortion of local governors, and par- 
ticularly in this part of the country the destruction 
of industry consequent upon the oppressive govern- 
ment of Aly Pasha, his wars, his progresses, his 
arbitrary demands, and the forced maintenance of 
his Albanian soldiers. 

The Greeks being in that small proportion at 
Larissa which I have stated, are ill-treated when- 
ever any affair in which a Turk is concerned is 
brought before the kady. Not many days ago, a 
Greek entering the town with an ass-load of char- 
coal, from one of the mountains which supply 
Larissa, was killed by a Turk, for no other reason 
than because the latter wished to have the char- 


Ix. | THESSALIA. 448. 


coal, while the Greek insisted upon carrying it to 
the market, where he was more sure of being paid 
for it. As the poor Greek had no friends ready 
with the proper compliment for the kady, and 
none of the persons who were present at the mur- 
der, and who were chiefly Turks, were able or 
willing to swear that he saw the Turk point the 
pistol or pull the trigger, the kady declared there 
was a want of evidence, and discharged the prisoner. 
As three Christian witnesses are only considered 
equal to one Turk, there is little chance of justice 
for the Christian at the Turkish tribunal. Where 
Christians only are concerned, the Turkish law 
seldom interferes, except in criminal cases, leaving 
the affair to the bishop or hodjabashi. The Greeks 
nevertheless not unfrequently carry their disputes 
to the mekhemé, though they generally have reason 
to repent it. 

Here, as in other parts of Turkey, the Jews are 
less oppressed, unless perhaps when by some im- 
prudence they allow it to be suspected that they 
are wealthy, and thus excite extortion. The pre- 
ference of the Turks for the Jews does not arise 
from any respect for this people, whom they hold 
in extreme contempt, but because they have no 
fears from the Jews, while they consider the 
Christians as the natural allies of their European 
enemies, by whom the Ottoman Empire is destined 
to be overthrown, and the Musulman faith to be 
destroyed. TheJews moreover recommend them- 
selves to the Turks as being ardent haters of the 
Greeks. At Larissa they speak Spanish, in com- 
mon with those of the rest of Greece, whose ances- 


444 THESSALIA. [CHAP. 


tors migrated to this country in great numbers, 
when expelled from Spain by Ferdinand and Isa- 
bella. Benjamin of Tudela, in his journey through 
Greece, three centuries earlier, did not pass through 
Larissa, so that we remain uninformed whether any 
Jews then inhabited this city. | 

The greater part of the rich plain which lies be- 
tween Larissa and Mount Olympus is inhabited by 
a race of Turks cultivating their own lands and 
employed almost entirely in agriculture. They are 
descendants of the earliest Turkish settlers, and by 
the Greeks are called Koniaridhes', a name as old 
probably as the eleventh century, when Iconium 
was the seat of Turkish power, and when Turkish 
auxiliaries were employed by Alexius Comnenus 
in Thessaly against the Normans: though their 
permanent settlement in this country cannot be 
attributed to an earlier period than the 14th cen- 
tury, after their conquest of Adrianople. Some of 
the Koniaric villages, which are about twenty in 
number, are situated towards Mount Ossa, and 
others to the southward of Larissa. The larger are 
divided into several makhalas, and the whole Ko- 
niaric population is not less than ten or twelve 
thousand. 

Nov. 22.—From Larissa to Férsala.—The great 
plain of Lower Thessaly, or Pelasgiotis, of which’ 
Larissa is still the chief city, extends from the 
mountains Z%tarus and Ossa to Pelium, and the 
branches of Othrys, interrupted only by a moun- 
tain of no great height now called Karadagh, or in 
Greek Mavrovuni, which, by means of an inferior 


* Κονιάριδες. 


TX. | THESSALIA. 445 


ridge not far north of Férsala, is united with the 
heights on the right bank of the Salamvria, which 
separate the Pelasgic plains from the equally ex- 
tensive levels of Upper Thessaly, which constituted 
the ancient divisions named Thessaliotis and His- 
tieotis. The ridge to the north of Férsala, al- 
though the lowest of all the heights around these 
plains, is sufficiently high to be seen from Larissa 
at a distance of fifteen miles; and one point in it, 
which lies nearly in a line between Larissa and 
Férsala, is rendered conspicuous by several tall 
cypresses round the tomb of a Turkish sheikh or 
saint. The road begins to rise very gradually to 
this ridge, from a point not far from Larissa; so 
that between Zarko and Larissa the lowest level is 
narrow on the right bank of the river, though very 
extensive on the left. Below Larissa the lowest 
level widens on the right bank towards the foot of 
Mount Ossa, and here is the inundation which I 
have already mentioned: it is called Karatjair, 
and corresponds exactly to the ancient Nessonis 
which Strabo has described as “ἃ lake in the 
Larissea, formed by the overflowing of the 
river'.” In fact, there is no other lake in the 
Thessalian plains, except that of Karla, which 
seems from its position to accord equally well with 
the ancient Beebeis. 


* Λαρισσαῖοι πλησίον μὲν τῇ Νεσσωνίδι, εἰς ἣν ὑπερκλύ- 
οἰκοῦντες τοῦ ἸἸηνειοῦ, γειτνιῶν- ζων ὁ ποταμὸς αφηρεῖτο τὶ τῆς 
τες δ᾽ ἐκεινοις (sc. Perrhzebis) dpociov τοὺς Λαρισσαίους" 
γεμόμενοι δὲ τὰ εὐδαιμονέστατα εἰλλ᾽ ὕστερον παραχώμασιν ἐπη- 
μέρη τῶν πεδίων, πλὴν εἴ τι νώρθωσαν Λαρισσαῖοι...----ϑίτα- 


σφόδρα κοῖλον πρὸς τῇ λίμνῃ bo, p. 440. 


446 THESSALIA. [ CHAP. 


From the point where the road begins to rise, as 
far as the summit of the ridge of the Sheikh, the 
whole country has a gently undulated surface, and 
consists of a fertile soil, which, though well culti- 
vated around several small villages, has far the 
largest portion, particularly on the right side of 
the road, in a state of nature, and covered with 
thorns. The cultivated land is ploughed but not 
yet sown. The other parts furnish an excellent 
pasture to the sheep, which are driven here in 
great numbers in winter from the mountains 
around Thessaly. All the southern part of the 
country just mentioned I take to have been the ter- 
ritory of the Crannonii, more anciently named 
Ephyrei’, the extent of whose pastures may be in- 
ferred from the allusion made by Theocritus to the 
numerous flocks and herds possessed by the Sco- 
padze *, one of the leading families of Crannon. 

At the end of two hours and a half we halt for 
dinner at a fountain; and proceeding at 12.40, 
arrive at the summit of the ridge of the Sheikh at a 
little after 2. The only trees I have seen on the route 


1 Pindar. Pyth. 10, v. 85. Strabo, p. 442. Stephan. in 
Κράνων. 


2 Πολλοὶ δὲ Σκοπάδαισιν ἐλαυνόμενοι ποτὶ σακὸν 
Μόσχοι σὺν κεραοῖσιν ἐμυκήσαντο βόεσσι. 
Μυρία δ᾽ ἀμπεδίον Κρανώνιον ἐνδιάασκον 
Ποιμένες ἔκκριτα μῆλα φιλοξείνοισι Kpewvdace. 
Theocr. Id. 16, v. 86. 


Scopas was son of Creon hand of the daughter of Cleis- 
and Echecratia. thenes of Sicyon.—Herodot. 
Diactorides, one of the Sco-~- 1. 6, c. 127. 
pade, was ἃ suitor for the 


IX. | THESSALIA. 447 


are wild pears and dwarf oaks, the latter of which 
cover a large tract of the uncultivated downs, and 
are not more than a foot high, though exactly re- 
sembling the common oak, and still bearing both 
leaves and acorns. The road crosses the ridge at 
a mile to the right of the Sheikh, and at the sum- 
mit opens upon an extensive prospect, but which 
is not seen to-day to advantage on account of the 
cloudiness of the atmosphere. On a clear day it 
commands the greatest part of Thessaly, included 
within the renowned barriers of Olympus, Ossa, 
Pelium, Othrys, and Pindus. Pelium, however, 
particularly its southern part, is considerably 
hidden by Mount Karadagh. We look down 
immediately upon the valley of the Hmpeus, and 
the scene of the great victory which gave the 
world to Cesar. It is bounded on the other 
side by a range of mountains branching from 
Othrys, the summit of which is seen above them 
to the south-eastward. The town of Férsala lies 
at the foot of the hills, immediately opposite to 
us. To the right, the extensive plain, watered 
by the Enipeus, Apidanus, and Peneius, is spread 
at the foot of the Agrafidtiko, or great snowy range 
of ‘Agrafa. ‘The ridge of the Sheikh, which has a 
rise almost imperceptible on the north, slopes 
rapidly into the Pharsalan valley, leaving on the 
descent the village of Tataris a little to the right. 
Several other Turkish villages occupy the valley 
as well as the hills on either side. At 2.23 we 
enter the level, and at 2.55 ford the Fersaliti, as 
the Greeks now call the Hnipeus, just below a 
handsome bridge of seven arches, which shows that 
12 


448 THESSALIA. [ CHAP. 


the river is sometimes formidable, though now 
narrow, clear, and about two feet deep, flowing 
with a slow current; from thence, crossing some 
open corn-land we enter Férsala at 3.30. 

Férsala, called Tjataltje by the Turks, and often 
by the Greeks’, covers the foot of a height, some- 
what detached from the rest of the range, which 
bounds the valley of the Hnipeus to the southward, 
and having a natural citadel formed by a tabu- 
lar summit which is encircled by a low precipice 
of rock. The town contains between six and 
seven hundred inhabited houses, and many others 
empty: there are five or six mosques, and the 
population is entirely Turkish, except at the two 
extremities of the town to the east and west, which 
are inhabited by Greek artisans, and keepers of 
shops in the bazar, or by zevghites*, who cultivate 
the Turkish lands in the immediate neighbourhood 
of the town. Our konak is at a shopkeeper’s at 
the eastern end of the town,—a neat cottage with 
a plastered floor, well furnished with mats and 
other stromata *, and having a yard which contains 
a stable and a good provision of fire-wood.. 


' τὰ Φέρσαλα, Τζατάλτζε. 

2. ζευγίταις. 

° Στρώματα : mats, carpets, 
cushions, and mattresses, co- 
vered with carpets or cloth, 
and sometimes with costly stuffs 
made of linen, cotton, or silk ; 
with the exception, in short, of 
a diminutive table used only for 
eating, stromata are the entire 


furniture of an Oriental apart- 
ment, serving for drawing- 
room, dining-room, and bed- 
chamber. The description of 
Aristophanes (Acharn. v. 1089) 
in the line κλίγαι, τραπέζαι, 
προκεφάλαια, στρώματα, shows 
that the Greeks have always 
furnished their houses nearly 
in the same manner. It is one 


1x. | THESSALTA. 449 


Férsala is one of the most important military 
positions in Greece, as standing at the entrance of 
the most direct and central of the passes which 
lead from the plains of Thessaly to the vale of 
the Sperchews and Thermopyle. With a view 
to ancient warfare, the place had all the best 
attributes of a Hellenic polis or fortified town : 
a hill rising gradually to the height of six or 
seven hundred feet above the adjacent plain, 
defended on three sides by precipices, crowned 
with a small level for an acropolis, watered in 
every part of the declivity by subterraneous 
springs, and still more abundantly at the foot by 
sources so copious as to form a perennial stream. 
With these local advantages, and one of the 
most fertile plains in Greece for its territory, 
Pharsalus inevitably attained to the highest rank 
among the states of Thessaly, and became one of 
the largest cities of Greece, as its ruined walls still 
attest. 

The height which was occupied by the Acropo- 
lis, consists of two rocky tabular summits, united 
by a lower ridge. The western summit is lower 
than the eastern, and is not above a third of it in 
length. The entire Acropolis was about five 
hundred yards long, and from one hundred to fifty 
broad, but still narrower in the connecting ridge, 
where are the remains of two gates nearly op- 
posite to each other, one of which led down a 


among the Greek luxurieswhich another powerful instrument in 
have subdued the hardy Turk. [115 corruption. 
The American weed has been 


YOE. 1, as 


450 THESSALIA. [ CHAP. 


steep descent at the back of the Acropolis, the 
other into the city. On one side of the northern 
gateway, the ancient masonry consists of irregular 
masses of rock, having smaller stones in the inter- 
vals, as at Tiryns ; but the masses are not so large 
as some of those in the latter ruin: one measures 
5 feet 7 inches, by 3.10 by 2.4. Another piece 
of wall toward the eastern summit seems to be of 
an antiquity not less remote. All the other re- 
mains, both of the town and citadel, are of the kind 
of masonry which was employed about the time 
when history gives reason to believe that Phar- 
salus was very populous and powerful’. There 
is a monument, however, of very early times in 
the middle of the Acropolis, which taken to- 
gether with the remnants of Cyclopian walls, 
may favor the opinion that this city was the 
capital of Phthia in the time of the Trojan war. 
It is a subterraneous construction, built in the 
same manner as the treasury of Atreus at Mycene. 
Below an oval opening, level with the present 
surface of the ground, eight feet two inches long, 
and six feet ten inches broad, eight courses of 
stone, in all about ten feet high, nearly cubical, 


* None but the most opu- 
lent republics could maintain 


rous, as well as the best of the 
cavalry of Parmenio; and by 


large bodies of cavalry, and for 
this kind of military force Phar- 
salus was eminent even among 
the Thessalians. In the battle 
of Gaugamela, the Pharsalian 
horsemen (οἱ τῶν Φαρσηλίων 
ἱππεῖς) were the most nume- 


12 


their conduct had already saved 
the right wing, before Alexan- 
der, who was diverted by its 
danger from his pursuit of Da- 
rius, had arrived. Arrian, 1. 3, 
οὐ 11. FG. 


IX. | THESSALIA. 451 


and laid together as usual without cement, are visi- 
ble above the rubbish which fills up all the lower 
part of the monument. In the three or four upper 
courses, each course projects a little beyond the one 
below it; but those below, as far as they are visi- 
ble, have the spheroidal curve of the interior of the 
treasury of Atreus. 

The Acropolis of Pharsalus was replaced by a 
castle of Roman, or Imperial Greek times, which is 
now itself a complete ruin. It included not only 
the level occupied by the Acropolis, but the upper 
part of the adjacent slope to the north, inclosing 
about a sixth part of the ancient city. At the top 
of the hill the walls of this castle were raised on the 
remains of the Hellenic inclosure, but on the slope 
they were constructed, from the foundation, of 
rough materials mixed with mortar, though cased 
in some parts with squared blocks taken from the 
more ancient ruins: in this part they are thicker 
even than the Hellenic walls, being not less than 
eleven feet. In the Acropolis are two or three cis- 
terns of the same kind of masonry as the modern 
castle ; one of these is fifty-five feet long and 
twenty-five broad. The summit of the hill com- 
mands a most extensive view, bounded to the north 
by Olympus, and comprehending to the westward 
all the great plains of Upper Thessaly as far as 
Trikkala and the rocks of Metéora. Due south is 
seen a high summit near Zitani, between which 
and the ridges near Férsala is an elevated valley, 
containing the villages Kaklidji and Tjeutma. 

The ancient city was near four miles in circuit, 

VOL. I. Gg2 -τ- 


452 THESSALIA. | CHAP. 


and of the very common form of an irregular tri- 
angle; the walls are traceable on the two descend- 
ing sides in their entire extent. On the eastern 
slope of the mountain, which is very steep, and 
naturally defended by a torrent, there are no 
towers, nor even any of those short flanks which 
were common among the Greeks when towers 
were not employed. Near the north-eastern angle 
a piece of the ancient wall, having eight regular 
courses of masonry, now forms part of the wall of 
the episcopal church of Férsala. In few other 
parts of the ancient inclosure so many courses 
remain. 

On the western side, the walls, towards the 
upper part, made a wide sweep, for the purpose of 
following the crest of two detached heights, and 
that of a ridge which unites them. Between the 
citadel and the nearest of these two summits, which 
is rocky, and rises almost to a level with the cita- 
del, the ground is hollow, with a gradual declivity, 
and is consequently weaker than in other parts ; 
hence the hollow was fortified with a second wall, 
distant fifty yards from the outer, and having an 
obtuse re-entering angle in the middle. The ridge 
which unites the two heights just mentioned being 
almost at right angles with the double wall, 
formed an additional security to this weak point. 
The northern, or lower wall of the city, on the 
edge of the plain, was a mile in length; it is trace- 
able only in a few places, chiefly where excava- 
tions have been made by modern masons, to take 
away the foundations, and which thus sufficiently 


Tx. | THESSALIA. 453 


show to what we are to attribute the disappearance 
of this wall. There are still, however, some re- 
mains of it above ground at the western extremity 
of the modern town, particularly at the foot of a 
rock above a pool and some sources of water, 
uniting in a permanent stream, which, after a 
winding course through the plain, jos the Eni- 
peus, near Vashli. Near the pool are two courses 
of a tower, 20 feet square, from which it may be 
judged that all this northern front of the town, on 
account of its being naturally the weakest, was 
fortified by a chain of towers, although there were 
very few on the western, and none on the eastern 
face of the city. A few stones remaining in their 
places to the westward of the springs, show that 
the northern wall joined the western, exactly at 
the spot where the road from the west enters the 
modern town. 

Besides the fountains which issue from the rocks 
below the town, in many pellucid streams, and 
which were obviously one of the recommendations 
of the site to the founders of the city, the Pharsalii 
were supplied from sources on the height by an 
aqueduct, excavated in the form of a deep trough 
in the rock, and covered with large stones reach- 
ing from side to side. At one place I observed a 
descent into the conduit of several steps, and a 
piece of wall of a later date, formed of tiles which 
crossed the opening. The modern Pharsalians 
supply the fountains of their town in the same man- 
ner; the lower sources serving only for washing, 
or to gratify the Turks in summer by the coolness, 
the agreeable sound of the running water, and the 


454 THESSALIA. [CHAP. 


shade of the plane trees. In order to enjoy these 
favorite luxuries the better, they have constructed 
several kiosks, in some of which the water issues 
from the ground in the building. The margins of 
the springs are bordered by squared blocks, some 
of which were probably placed there by the an- 
cients ; others have been transferred from the 
ruined walls to their actual positions by the Turks. 
Many wrought stones are to be seen in the houses, 
steps, and pavements of the town, but I can find 
no relics of sculpture, and only one inscription 
(No. 14), which is inserted in the wall of the 
Greek church. It was the monument of Aurelia 
Phila who denounces a penalty against any one 
who shall open her tomb, or place another body 
in it, and is curious only for its bad spelling: 
παραγγέλλει 15 written παρανγελλι-- τεθῆναι, τεθηνε---- 
εἰς, wc—avoigat, ανυξε. 

Noy. 23.—Having moved from Férsala at 1.9, 
P.M. in a westerly direction, we pass through an 
opening which separates the ridges adjoining to 
the ancient site from a north-western projection 
of the same range, and at 2.15 re-enter the great 
plain. The hills now take a direction to the 
south-west, as far as Ghynekokastro, from whence 
to the head of the plain under Dhomoké6 they 
trend more to the south. At a distance of about 
10 miles to the westward are the lower heights 
of ‘Agrafa and behind them the steep snowy 
mountains of that district. In re-entering the plain, 
Vrysia (Turcicé Bey Bunar) is a mile on the left, 
at the foot of the hills; the village takes its name 
from some very copious springs which issue from 


1X. | THESSALIA.. 455 


under the rocks a little below it, and form a con- 
siderable stream which we cross by a bridge at 
2.30. From hence the road leads directly to the 
point of Ghyneko-kastro’, where we arrive at 
2.55. All this corner of the plain, and as far as 
can be seen on the right, consists of a fine turf, 
now covered with sheep and cattle, with the ex- 
ception of a few patches of arable land, surround- 
ing some small Turkish villages. The soil seems 
equally adapted to cultivation or pasture, and as 
the adjacent hills furnish food to the cattle in 
summer when the plains are parched, the country 
well deserves the double character conveyed by 
the epithets which Homer attached to Phthia’. 
Ghyneko-kastro is the modern name of a Hel- 
lenic ruin, standing upon an extremity of the 
Phthotic ridges; remains of walls of the third 
order of masonry inclose the north-western face of 
the hill, which slopes in that direction, and sur- 
round also a long narrow tabular summit, which 
was the ancient Acropolis. At the back the de- 
scent is more rapid, and on that side the wall and 
towers of the citadel remain perfect to one third 
of their original height. Although small compared 
with Pharsalus, this seems to have been a place of 
some importance. After having remained here a 
quarter of an hour, we proceed, and soon arrive in 
sight of Dhomok6, situated on the summit of the 
ridge which here closes the plain. Half an hour 


1 ΡῬυναικό-καστρον. 
ὁ Φθίῃ ἐριβώλακι βωτιανείρῃ. 
a τα Το: 


456 THESSALIA. [CHAP. 


beyond Ghyneko-kastro we pass some sources on the 
right side of the road; and on the left a ruined 
mosque standing onaheight. Here is an extensive 
Turkish burying-ground, in which one of the 
tomb-stones is an ancient Greek statue of a female, 
wanting the head. From the mosque we cross 
direct towards Dhomok6, which does not lie ex- 
actly above the extremity of the plain, but rather 
towards the ‘Agrafa side, and in one hour and 25 
minutes from the mosque reach the foot of the hills, 
on which the town is situated, when leaving on 
the left. the direct road to Zitini, we arrive at the 
town at 5.15, after a tedious ascent of 40 minutes, 
rendered disagreeable by the rain, and difficult 
by the slippery path, and the weakness of our 
wretched cattle. Dhomok6’ contains about 300 
families and several large houses: half the inha- 
bitants are Greek and half Turks. The situation 
resembles that of Dhimitzana in the Moréa, stand- 
ing upon the two sides and crest of a ridge ina 
very lofty situation. In the menzil road, which 
we quitted at the foot of the mountain, is a large 
khan, on one side of which a copious spring and 
pool of water supplies canals, which after turn- 
ing several mills on the side of the hill, are 
collected into a small stream flowing to join the 
others of similar origin, which we have this day 
passed. The house in which I lodge belongs to 
four partners’ in trade, all of whom have their 
families in the house. 

Nov. 24.—This being Sunday, the usual market 


' Δομοκύς. * συντρόφοι. 


Ix. | ; THESSALIA. 457 


day in Greece, a concourse of people crowd the 
village, buying and selling corn, maize, and other 
agricultural commodities. There is no want of 
evidence to show that Dhomoko stands exactly on 
the site of the ancient Thaumaci. The bishop, 
who is one of the suffragans of Larissa, is styled 
ὃ Θαυμάκου καὶ Ζητουνίου; and two inscribed mar- 
bles are still preserved, in which the words πόλις 
Θαυμακῶν occur several times'. Many Hellenic 
foundations are to be seen around the town, though 


1 


. Φ . . . ° e . .Φ e . .Ψ . . Φ 
~ > / “ “ὦ ~ 
τοῖς ἐντυγχάνουσι κατ᾽ ἰδίαν τῶν πολι . . . 
“ὦ , ~ , - Ay 
τῶν συμφερόντων TH πόλει TH Θαυν(μακῶν). . . . . 
> ΄ μϑν ~ , ~ ~ 3 , 
ne ἀντεχομένῳ ἔδίοξε τῇ πόλει τῇ Θαυμακῶν ἐπαίνε-) 

‘ "A ὃ θέ 25 ~ a , ι e\ 3, ( LZ \ \ ͵ 
σαΐ τε ᾿Ανδροσθένην ἐπὶ τῇ προαιρέσει ἣν ἔχίων τυγχάνει πρὸς τὴν πόλι») 
ἐν τοῖς διαπεπραγμένοις ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ εὐχρησ(τήμασι, καὶ εἶναι αὐτὸν τῆς πό-) 
λεως τῆς Θαυμακῶν πρόξενον καὶ εὐεργέτην (καὶ ὑπάρχειν αὐτῷ, Ta-) 
ρὰ τῆς πόλεως Θαυμακῶν τὰ τίμια καὶ φιλάνθίρωπα ὅσα τοῖς ἄλλοις) 

, ~ Χ ἂψ 
(εὐεργέγταις τῆς πόλεως ὑπάρχει καὶ τοὺς απ δἰ. τὰ ων 
Ἀν τ τ τ (ἀντίγγραφον τοῦ ψηφίσματο(ς ieee treme: ὧν 
. . (ἐν) ἀναγραφῇ τὸ ψήφισμα καὶ τὰ δεδογμένα. . 


᾿Αγαθᾷ Τύχᾳ. Πόλις Θαυ- μακῶν ἔδωκεν Πύῤῥᾳ Τιμαγό- 
μακῶν ἔδωκε ᾿Αγέστῳ ᾿Αγρολέω- ρου Ἡρακλειώτᾳ, ὄντι εὐεργέτᾳ 
voc Καλλιεῖ προξενίαν, ἔπινο- αὐτᾶς, προξενίαν, ἰσοπολιτείαν, 
μίαν, ἀσυλίαν, ἀσφάλειαν, ἔν- ἐπινομίαν, ἀσυλίαν, ἀσφάλειαν, 
κτησιν, ἀτέλειαν πάντων, καὶ ἔνκτησιν, ἀτέλειαν πάντων, καὶ 
πολέμου καὶ εἰράνας, ἐν τὸν πολέμου καὶ εἰράνας, καὶ αὐτῷ 
ἅπαντα χρόνον, καὶ αὐτῷ καὶ καὶ ἐκγόνοις, ἐν τὸν ἅπαντα 
ἐκγόνοις, καὶ ὅσα τοῖς ἄλλοις χρόνον καὶ ὅσα τοῖς ἄλλοις 
πρόξενος πάντα ἀρχόντων προξένοις πάντα, ἀρχόντων. .. 
Σφοδρία, Λε. ....«..Ὁ. φανα, ..... Νικομάχου, ἔνγυος τᾶς 
ἔνγυος rac προξενίας Πολυμ- προξενίας Νεοπτόλεμος Ἑηθί- 
vl. Gay Cov. 


᾿Αγαθᾷ Τύχᾳ. Πόλις Oav- V. Inscriptions 15, 16, 17. 


458 THESSALIA. [CHAP. 


too disjointed to indicate the exact plan or extent 
of the place. The inscriptions are grants of prox- 
enia, to foreign benefactors, with the accompany- 
ing privileges : two of the favoured persons were 
citizens of Heracleia and of Callium, both which 
towns were in or near the valley of the Sper- 
cheius. At the southern end of the town a 
rocky point overtopping the other heights, com- 
mands a magnificent prospect of the immense plain 
watered by the Peneius, and its branches, which 
extends from Pharsalus to Aiginium; behind the 
latter rise the rocks of the Metéora, distant at 
least 50 miles in a direct line. This is the view 
which Livy describes, following probably the words 
of Polybius, in relating an attempt made upon Thau- 
maci by Philip son of Demetrius, at the close of the 
year (B.c. 199) which preceded that of his defeat 
at the Aoi Stena. The historian remarks that 
Thaumaci was situated in the pass called Ceela, in 
a lofty position defended by precipices, where the 
traveller entering Thessaly from Thermopyle and 
Lamia, after having passed over rugged mountains 
and intricate valleys, suddenly came in sight of a 
plain resembling an immense sea, and so extensive 
that its extremity was scarcely visible’. A rein- 
forcement of Aitolians having penetrated through 
the guards of Philip into the city, he abandoned 
the siege, and retired into winter quarters in 
Macedonia. 


1 Thaumaci a Pylis sinuque Thessalizque transeunti con- 
Maliaco per Lamiam euntiloco  fragosa loca implicatasque flex- 
alto siti sunt ipsis faucibus  ibus vallium vias, ubi ventum 
imminentes quas Coela vocant: ad hance urbem est, repente 


Ts: | THESSALIA. 459 


The situations of Pharsalus and Thaumaci being 
determined with certainty, there remains the great- 
est probability that Ghyneko-kastro 1s the ancient 
Proerna which Strabo names among the towns of 
Phthiotis, together with Thaumaci and Pharsalus'’, 
and which in the war with Antiochus, eight years 
after the transaction just alluded to, was taken by 
the Consul Acilius, in his way from Larissa to 
Hypata. On this occasion his first march was from 
Larissa to Crannon. As he advanced, he received 
the submission of Pharsalus, Scotussa, and Phere, 
took Proerna and some castles near it, but was 
attacked as he approached Thaumaci from the 
woods and mountains overhanging the pass; he 
penetrated however to the town, which had been 
deserted, and the next day, arriving upon the 
banks of the Spercheius, ravaged the lands of the 
Hypate?’. 

On quitting Dhomoko we make a circuit of the 
hill, and proceed by a short descent into an ele- 
vated plain, which extends south-eastward to the 
foot of the mountain of Gura, the proper Othrys, 
and to the northward rises by a gentle slope to the 
summit behind Férsala. Having traversed this 
plain, we descend over an uncultivated tract into 
the lower plain of Taukli, leaving a mile to the 
right the nearest part of the lake of Taukli, which 


velut maris vasti sic immensa quod saxo undique abscisso 
panditur planities, ut subjectos rupibus imposita est. — Liv. 
campos terminare oculis haud 1. 32, ο. 4. 

facile queas. Ab eo miraculo * Strabo, p. 434. 

Thaumaci appellati, nec alti- δ Liv. 1. 36,:c. 14. 

tudine solum tuta urbs, sed 


460 THESSALIA. [CHAP. 


occupies all the lowest part of the plain, and is six 
miles in circumference. The greatest dimension of 
the plain is from east to west ; the soil seems fertile, 
but is little cultivated. We cross it obliquely by 
a road which the rain of yesterday has rendered 
very bad, and having reached the hills on the 
southern side, leave Taukli on the right, and beyond 
it a promontory or peninsula in the lake, distant 
two or three miles from us, on which are some 
remains of ruined edifices. It is probably the 
ancient Xynia, for that place gave name to a lake 
on the southern borders of Thessaly, not far from 
the country of the A‘nianes, who inhabited the 
valley of the Spercheius’. Beyond the lake the 
ground rises to the hills of “Agrafa. 

In the plain of Taukli we joined the main road 
from Férsala to Zitani, which crosses the moun- 
tain at the back of the former town, leaving the 
summit on the right. The heights of Taukli are 
part of a ridge which branching from the mountain. 
of Gura, borders the plain of the Spercheius on the 
north, and is connected with the mountains of 
‘Agrafa to the west. Our passage over it is in the 
lowest part; but there is another pass to the west-_ 
ward called the dervéni of Karya, which leads 
from Taukli directly to Neépatra. These are the 
two natural entrances into Thessaly from the south- 
ward; and the plain of Taukli with Zitani, Dho- 
mok6, and Feérsala, are therefore the most im- 


1 Liv. 1. 32, c.18;-1/83, Catull. Carm 68, v. 287, (Stes 
ce. 8; 1. 39, c. 26. Polyb. phanus also mentions the lake, 
ap. Stephan. Byz. v. Zuvia. but confounds it with the 
Apollodor. Argon. 1. 1, ο. 67. Beebias or Beebeis. 


1X. | THESSALIA. 46] 


portant military positions of the frontier. Having 
ascended the ridge along the side of a gorge formed 
by a small torrent, we arrive in two hours and 
three quarters from Dhomok6 at a dervéni, where 
a guard is stationed for the protection of the pass. 
The rain falls heavily as we proceed, and the road 
is very bad, winding among woody mountains, but 
without much ascent. This is the δρυμὸς Μαλεαῖος, 
or Maliac forest, which, not long ago, was as danger- 
ous as it seems to have been in ancient times, but 
which now, thanks to the strong arm of Aly Pasha, 
is acknowledged to be free even from suspicion ', 
like the greater part of the country over which his 
guardianship as Dervént Aga extends. Anciently 
in some part of this forest stood the sepulchral mo- 
nument of a young man named Derxias, who had 
been murdered by robbers, and whose epitaph is 
still preserved in the Anthologia’. At the end of 
seventy-five minutes from the first dervéni we pass 
a second, which, as well as the whole defile, is 
known by the name of Furka. The road then 
begins to descend towards Zituni, and soon brings 
us in sight of the plain of the Spercheius. Fron 
the Furka to Zittini is a distance of one hour, in a 
direction more easterly than before. After some 
delay at the entrance of Zituni I obtain a lodging 
* ὑποψία. 
* Εἰπὲ ποτὶ Φθίαν εὐάμπελον ἤν ποθ᾽ ἵκηαι 
Καὶ πόλιν ἀρχαίαν, ὦ ξένε, Θαυμακίαν, 
‘Qe δρυμὸν Μαλεαῖον ἀναστείβων ποτ᾽ ἔρημον 
Εἶδες Λάμπωνος τόνδ᾽ ἐπὶ παιδὶ τάφον 
Δερξίᾳ, ὅν ποτε μοῦνον ἕλον δόλῳ οὐδ᾽ ἀναφανδὸν 


KX@ rec ἐπὶ Σπάρταν diay ἐπειγόμενον. 


Anthol. Jacobs, vol. ili, p. 287. 


462 THESSALIA. [CHAP. Ix. 


in the house of one of the principal Greeks, who is 
absent, but whose family is at home. The house 
is built on the same plan as the generality of the 
better sort of Greek houses in this part of the coun- 
try: a lower story serves chiefly as a stable and 
storehouse, the upper consists of a row of four 
chambers opening into a wide gallery, almost as 
large as all the other apartments together ; none of 
these has any door or window but into the gallery, 
and within they are black with smoke and dirt. 
The walls of the lower story are formed of loose 
stones cemented with mud, those of the upper of 
sun-baked bricks, plastered and whitewashed. In 
few of the houses are the walls upright, or the floors 
level, owing to the green timber and loose masonry, 
which settle into a distorted form. My konak is 
an extreme example, and seems to require only a 
slight earthquake, or a strong euroclydon, to crum- 
ble it into a heap of ruins. It has, nevertheless, 
stood these forty years, and is said to have settled 
into its present shape soon after it was built. 


ADDITIONAL NOTES 


TO 


CHAPTER I. 


Note I. 


BIOGRAPHY OF ALY PASHA. 


As poetry in a rude state of society generally precedes prose, 
as a record of events, or of the exploits of individuals, it is not 
surprising to find among the Albanians, that the actions of their 
hero Aly, have been committed to writing in verse. This com- 
position, of which I procured a copy in MS., consists of about 
4,500 στίχοι πολιτικοὶ, and although as barbarous in versifica- 
tion, phrase, and sentiment, as the manners which it depicts, is 
probably, as far as it goes, the most authentic memoir of the life 
of Aly which can be procured. The author was a Musulman 
Albanian, acquainted only with the colloquial Greek of Albania, 
and its borders, without the smallest tincture of Greek learning, 
and not even able to write his own verses. The language of the 
poem, therefore, most correctly represents the vulgar dialect of 
those countries, and may serve to compare with that of Southern 
Greece, of which an example has been given in Travels in the 
Morea, chap. viii. The work being thus in more than one 
respect curious, I have been induced to subjoin a brief descrip- 
tion of the subject-matter, together with a few extracts as speci- 
mens. The peculiarity of the dialect consists in the frequent 
use of Turkish words, which arises not so much from any exten- 
sive knowledge of that language possessed by the Mahometans 
of Greece and Albania, as from the Turkish manners and habits, 
which have been a consequence of the change of religion among 
the Albanians. In considering the poem as a historical docu- 


464 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


ment, it is necessary to remember, that as a poet the author 
uses exaggeration, and that as a Musulman, he regards the 
Christians as an inferior class, upon whom the treachery and 
cruelty exercised by his hero are little else than laudable proofs 
of wisdom and power. It is natural that he should differ in 
many of his facts relating to the Suliote war, as well as in some 
of the motives by which he accounts for them, from the Christian 
historian of Suli and Parga, of whose work an abstract is sub- 
joined as an additional note to chapter v. But this is the only 
material difference; it is certain that the Pasha’s craft and 
perseverance, his riches and superior strength, had gradually 
undermined the union, courage, and patriotism of the Suliotes, 
had filled them with suspicions of one another, and that some 
of them, tainted with avarice, had listened separately to his 
dezeitful promises, when famine came to his assistance, and 
completed that subjugation which after all might not otherwise 
have been effected. 
The poem begins without any title or name to it, thus: 


1805, Νοεμβρίου 25. 
ἰδοὺ γράφω τοῦ ᾿Αλῆ πασιᾶ ἀφέντημας τὰ θαύματα ὁποῦ ἔχει 


καμωμένα ἕως τὴν τελείωσιν τοῦ Σουλίου :— 


“ς Behold I write the wonders of our master, Aly Pasha, which 
he has done until the end (of the affair) of Suli.” 


Aly was the son of Vely and Khanko, who had a presentiment 
that if her son should be a male, he would live long, and lay 
down the law from Tepeléni to Edrené (Adrianople). 


~ = Ν ., 
κ᾽ εἶπε ἂν εἶναι σερνικὸ ᾿ πολὺ θέλει νὰ ζήσῃ 


am ἐδὼ καὶ στὸν ᾿Εντρενὲ νιζάμι" θὲ νὰ δώσῃ. 


Concerning the Pasha’s ancestors, the author remarks only 
that Mukhtar, his grandfather, distinguished himself at the siege 
of Corfai (in the year 1716), where he entered the castle by 
assault, and hung up his sword upon the gate. 

Vely Pasha being in a dying state calls his dependents around 
him, and recommends his son to their guidance and protection, 
during the inexperience of youth, lest he should lose the revenue 


1 ἀρσενικόν. 2 nizam T. order, 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 465 


of forty purses’ accruing from the district of Zagéri, which was his 
principal inheritance. 
τὶ 6 Κουρτπασιᾶς εἶναι ἄπιστος, εὐθὺς τόνε σκοτώνει, 
καὶ τὸ Ζαγόρι προβοδεῖ εὐθὺς καὶ τὸ ζαπώνει. 
“For Kurt Pasha is faithless, and will en τε ἬΝ] kill him, 
And will proceed to Zagori and take it.’ 


The first act of Aly Bey’s government is to summon all the 
chiefs of Zagori, and threaten them with his vengeance, if they 
should be persuaded to join Kurt Pasha. 


πήγαν καὶ τὸν προσκύνησαν τοῦ φίλησαν τὸ χέρι, 
καὶ τοῦ εἶπαν νὰ ὁποῦ ἤρθαμε ποῦ ἔστειλες χαμπέρι, 
ἡμεῖς ντοβᾶ " σοῦ κάμνομεν ἀφέντημας νὰ ζήσης; 
va στεριωθῆς στό πόστισου νὰ μᾶς κουμανταρίσης. 
‘“‘ They went and submitted, and kissed his hand, 
And said, Behold we have come upon receiving your message. 
We pray, my lord, that you may live, 
And be confirmed in your post, and command us.” 


Aly then proceeds to Paleo Ponghiani®, from which he exacts 
a ransom, and from thence to Zagori, his paternal property (τὸ 
βιὸ τὸ πατρικότου). 
καὶ τὸ Ζαγόρι βγήκανε καὶ τὸ ἐπροσκυνοῦνε, 
ἄνδρες γυναῖκες καὶ παιδιὰ τὸ μέστιτου * φιλοῦνε. 
“« Zagori came out (to meet him) and adored him: 
Men, women, and children kiss his sock.’’ 


Having collected his dues (κεῖνο ποῦ τοῦ τυχαίνει), Aly returns 
to Tepeléni. The people of Pogoghiani and Zagori, thinking 
themselves in danger of total ruin, resolve to have recourse to 
Kurt Pasha. 

ἤ παμεμεῖς" στὸν Κουρτπασιᾷ τὸν πόνονμας νὰ εἰποῦμεν, 
ἤ πάμε στὸ ἘΞερόβαλτο στήν λίμνην νὰ πνιγοῦμεν. 
““ Hither let us go to Kurt Pasha and tell him our griefs, 
Or let us go to Xer6-valto and drown ourselves in the lake.” 


1 Equivalent at that time to 3000/. * Mest, T. the under slipper, 
sterling. formed of a single leather, and gene- 

2 Dova, T. prayer. rally sewn to the trowsers. 

3 Πόγγιανη, properly Πογώγιανη. 5 ὑπάγομεν ἡμεῖς. 


708. I. Η ἢ 


466 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


Kurt consoles them with the assurance that he will send for 
Aly and punish him: then reflecting, that if he can rid himself 
of the young Bey he shall get all the Rayas into his own power, 
he sends a flattering letter to Tepeléni, offering to make Aly his 
kihayd and son-in-law. Aly, with the consent of his mother 
and tevabs (guardians), many of whom had been bribed by Kurt 
Pasha at the rate of a thousand Venetian sequins each, proceeds 
to Berat. ᾿ 

Not being admitted to an immediate audience on his arrival, 
the young Bey suspects some treachery. He refuses to drink 
the coffee offered to him, or to deliver up his arms; nor dare any 
of the attendants take them from him. 

The old Pasha then consults the Harém (τὸ χαρέμι, that is to 
say, his wife,) who remonstrates with Kurt for his intended 
treachery ; recalls to his recollection that none of his family had 
ever been guilty of such an act; asks him what account he will 
give of it after his death, and ends by advising him to make Aly 
his son-in-law instead of destroying him. 

Kurt states his reasons to his wife for wishing to get rid of Aly. 

She sends to Aly, bidding him to be of good courage: informs 
him that the complaints of Pogéghiani and. Zagori have been the 
cause of the Pasha’s evil intentions towards him, and assures him 
that he shall be delivered. 

Khanko, hearing of the imprisonment of her son, collects a 
large body of troops, and sends a threatening message to the 
Pasha, at the same time that she implores the wife of Kurt to 
obtain Aly’s release. 

On the further intreaties of the Harém the Pasha angrily 
consents, predicting at the same time that he shall repent of 
allowing Aly to depart. 

The people of Berat rejoice at the deliverance of Aly, and 
salute him as he passes through the streets; he returns the com- 
pliments, and utters threats against Kurt Pasha. 

ὅσο va ζῇ ὁ Κουρτπασιᾶς padre’ δὲν τοῦ δίνω 
καὶ ἀπ’ τὸ δικότου τὸ ῥαγιᾶ κανένα δὲν ἀφίνω, 
ὁ Κούρτης ἐπολέμησε τὸ τζάκιμου γὰ κλείσῃ 
καὶ τὸ δικόμου τὸ ῥαγιᾶ νὰ τὸν κληρονομήσῃ. 
“Aslong as Kurt Pasha lives I willnot allow him ἕο haveany repose ; 


1 Rahat, T. repose. 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 467 


Nor will I leave him a single Raya’. 
(For) Kurt has endeavoured to shut up my chimney’, 
And to inherit my Raya.” 


On his arrival at Tepeléni, Aly transmits similar threats in a 
letter to the Pasha, who replies in the same style. 

Khanko represents to her son the inequality of the contest, and 
that Kurt has riches to pay his troops, whereas 


ς - Va \ 7 ‘ / , 
ἡμεῖς λουφέ δὲ: ἔχομεν νὰ δώσωμεν στασκέρι. 


“78 have no pay to give to the army.” 


Aly replies, that he does not fear consequences, and will never 
pardon Kurt, who sent for him on pretence of giving him his 
daughter in marriage, and then endeavoured to take away 
his life. .. 

Khanko having found a wife for her son, he marries: but can- 
not forget the affront of Kurt Pasha; and Pogoghiani and Zagori, 
alarmed at his menaces, having intreated assistance from the 
Pasha of Berat, he is resolved to be revenged upon them as 
well as upon the inhabitants of Khérmovo, who, after having 
been long attached to his family, had rebelled against him. 

He fills his palace with ammunition and provision, treats all 
who come to him with hospitality, holds out the hope of plunder, 
and thus collects a considerable force; but is obliged, in an ad- 
dress to them, to confess his poverty. 


ἀπλώνει καὶ στὴν τζέπητου καὶ βρίσκει μιὰ ξηντάρα", 
x 4 / Ἁ x lf 9 9 δ Ζ 
μιὰν ἔξηντάρα μοναχὴ τὴν βγάνει an’ τὴν τζέπη, 
τὴν ἔδειξε στασκέριτου πασάνας νὰ τὴν βλέπ 
) ρ σάνας νὰ τὴν βλέπῃ, 
per. ~ 4 » ΄ 2 ΄ , 
κ᾽ εἶπε ποῦστε“ ἀσκέριμου καὶ ἐδικήμου φάρα, 
‘ \ ΄ , - (ὃ » , 
γιὰ τὸν λουφέσας σήμερα σᾶς δίδω μιὰ Envrapa, 
> 5 3s A ~ ὦ ‘ ~ \ 9. “ Ἀ - 
ἀπ᾽ ἐδὼ κεῖθε ξέρετε νὰ σᾶς τὸ εἰπῶ καὶ κεῖνο 


1 When the allied powers endea- 2 2, 6. to put an end to my family : 
voured to intercede in favour of the odjak, T. chimney. 
insurgent Greeks, the substance of 8 ‘EEnvrdpa, a piece of sixty 


the answer of the Porte, foralong paras, worth at that time four or 
time, was little more than, “Are five shillings. 

they not our Rayas?”’ meaning, have 4 ποῦ elore, where are you. 

we not a right to do as we like with 

our own human cattle? 


Hh 2 


468 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


ἀνίσως μοῦ γυρέψετε ἕν ἄσπρο δὲν σας δίδω" 

καὶ τοῦ εἴπανε, δὲν ἤρθαμε ἠμεῖς γιά τὸν παράσου, 
κουρμπάνι θὲ νὰ γένωμεν τώρα στὴν ἀφενδιάσου. 

μηδέ ψωμὶ δὲν θέλομεν ἀπὸ τὴν ἀφενδιάσου, 
pov’ θέλομεν νὰ στεριωϑῆς στὸ πόστι τοῦ μπαμπάσου. 

‘‘ He opens his pocket and finds one exindara: 

One exindara only he takes out of his pocket; 

He shews it to the army, that every one may see it. 

Behold, my army, says he, and my own tribe, 

For your pay I give you to-day one exindara, 

Henceforth know, for I tell it to you, 

That if you require an asper from me I cannot give it you. 

And they said to him we came not for your para (money), 

But we will become a sacrifice for your Lordship ; 

We only desire that you may be established in the post of 

your father.” 


Kurt sends three or four thousand men to Pogoghiani, and a 
larger body to Zagori; when Aly moves from Tepeléni, attacks 
and defeats them, and proceeds to Delvinaki. 


ὕποιος Kal κεῖταν στὸ χωριὸ τοὺς ἔκαμε ἰλάκι, 
ὅσοι καὶ ἂν ἦταν στὰ χωριὰ τούς ἔφαγαν τὰ φίδια, 
τοὺς τζάκισε τὰ γόνατα καὶ πλάταις καὶ παγίδια, 
‘* All those who were in the town he slaughtered, 


As many as were in the villages, the serpents ἡ devoured ; 
He broke their knees and shoulders and buttocks.” 


He then inflicts a similar punishment upon Zagori. 
ΤΑ es ~ / ~ \ μὴ ΄, 
amo ταῖς τέσσαρες μεριαῖς τους ἔβαλε τουφέκι 
ἐχάθη ὅλος ὁ ῥαγιᾶς καὶ σκόρπισαν αἰπέκει. 
‘‘ From the four quarters he gave them the musket ; 


The Rayas were destroyed and dispersed.” 


Kurt Pasha, meantime, endeavours to surprise Tepeléni; but 
Aly, learning his design, returns home in haste, performing a 
journey of twenty hours in eight. The Pasha retreats im- 


mediately. 


1 Aly often ended his written will do lest the serpent bite you,’— 
orders with the words, “This you νά μὴ σᾶς τρώγῃ τὸ φίδι. 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


469 


Aly now sends a summons to the people of Khérmovo, order- 
ing them to submit, to honour the Turks’, and to pay the 


Kharatj. 


οἱ Χορμοβίταις ἄνοιξαν τὸ ypdppa καὶ διαβάζουν, 


τὸν Tlaove πρίφτη γλήγορα στὴν ἐκκλησιὰ τὸν κράζουν" 


αὐτὸς εἶναι στὸ Χόρμοβο ποῦ σπέρνει καὶ θερίζει. 


ie ~ Ν 
καὶ προεστὸ τὸν ἔχουνε ποῦ τοὺς κουμανταρίζει. 


** The Khormovites opened the letter and read it, 
They quickly called Tzats Prifti to the church: 
At Khormovo he was the man who sows and reaps ; 
And they had him as proestés to command them.” 


They send Aly a message of defiance, upon which he mounts 
his horse Belidsi, swifter than a flying bird, and falls upon Khér- 


movo sword in hand. 


κ᾿ ‘ x Ν Ν , \ ~ 
σὰν τὰ σφαχτὰ στὸ χασαπιὸ κόφτουν Kal πελεκοῦνε, 


> ,ὔ soe 3) \ \ \ ~ 
ακομι θαῤῥος εχουνε Kae δὲν TOV προσκυνουνε" 


σὰν κλόσαις μὲ πολλὰ πουλιὰ ποῦ βλέπουν TO cain, 


ἔτζι φωνάζουν οἱ πικρὸι καὶ ῥαϊ δὲν τοὺς ἐδίδει" 


ἐμβῆκε ἀπὸ τὴν μία μεριὰ καὶ ἀπὸ τὴν ἄλλη βγένει, 


ποδοπατάει τὰ κορμιὰ καὶ ἀκόμι δὲν χορταίνει" 
᾿Αλῆ Βελῆς βουλήθηκε ψυχὴ νὰ μὴν ἀφήσῃ, 


καὶ χύθηκαν τασκέριτου σὰ μανιωμένοι λύκοι. 


** They cut and hew them like sheep in the butchery, 
Yet they still have courage, and do not submit : 
Like hens with many chickens, who perceive the falcon, 
So they bitterly cry out while he gives them no quarter ; 
He entered on one side and came out at the other: 
He treads on the bodies and is not yet satisfied ; 
(For) Aly Vely ἢ resolved to leave not a soul, 


1 The Khormovites had been 
notorious for murdering every Turk 
they could lay hold of. The poet is 
silent as to the ill-treatment of Aly’s 
mother and sister soon after his 
father’s death, which was the chief 
cause of his inveterate hatred to- 
wards Khérmovo; but this was a 


subject which neither as a Musul- 
man, nor from respect to his hero, 
the poet could allude to. 

2 In his youth Aly was called 
Aly Vely, i.e. Aly, son of Vely. 
The Vely was dropt when he be- 
came a Pasha, except on his sig- 
net, . 


470 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


His troops poured down like hungry wolves ; 
Aly Vely commanded them to find the Tzats Prifti : 
The unhappy man was hidden in the midst of blood.” 


At length— 
τὸ σκοτινὸ τὸ Χόρμοβο ἐγίνηκε βιράνι" 


καὶ Τζαοὺς Πρίφτης ἐγίνηκε κεμπάμπι" στὸ τηγάνι 


“ΤῊ 6 dark Khérmovo became a ruin, 
And Tzats Prifti became roast meat in the frying-pan.” 


Aly next attacks Maliséva, a town inhabited by Rayas of 
Kurt Pasha, who were so much favoured by him that he would 
not listen to any complaints made to him of their repeated rob- 
beries on the highways. They treat the summons of Aly Bey 
with contempt, upon which he enters the place, slaughters many 
and makes the rest prisoners. He then takes Klistra, with 
Kurt’s officer, (τὸν ἄνθρωπον τοῦ Κουρτπασιᾶ,) who commanded 
there, cuts off his mustachios, and allows the garrison to return. 
Thence he proceeds to Labovo; whither Kurt Pasha sends a 
large body of troops to expel him, but they are defeated after a 
severe contest. 

The Sultan, (ὁ βασιλέας,) pleased with Aly’s performances, 
confers the government of the Sanjak of Délvino upon him, and 
makes him Pasha of two tails. He proceeds with 10,000 men ὃ 
to Délvino, but is not long there before he receives a new fir- 
mahn from the Sultan, ordering him, after putting the affairs of 
Délvino in good order, and collecting the miri, to proceed to 
Trikkala, from whence he is instructed to expel the deputy (τὸν 
ἄνθρωπον) of Kurt Pasha, who commanded the militia (ro ἀρμα- 
τολίκι) because they devoured the Raya like ravenous wolves, od 
μανιωμένοι λύκοι. 

Aly, having transmitted the miri of his Albanian districts to 
Constantinople, proceeds to Trikkala, and Kurt Pasha’s lieute- 
nant makes his retreat to Berat. Kurt, afflicted at his loss and 
disgrace, laments that he had not put Aly to death when in his 


1 Wiran, T. ruin. poem: in which respect, indeed, all 
2 Kebab, T. roast. Oriental narratives may be sus- 
3 No greatreliance is tobe placed _ pected of exaggeration. 

upon any of the numbers in this 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 471] 


power, and soon afterwards dies. Aly grieves a little (λυπήθηκε 
λιγάκι) at the loss of this “column of the Sanjak of Vliéra” (Av- 
lona). 

As soon as the troops of Kurt in the Dervénia, or passes of 
Northern Greece, hear of his death, they disperse, and the 
thieves make their appearance. Mahmiad Pasha of Skodra, de- 
sirous of succeeding Kurt Pasha in the office of Dervent-Aga 
of Northern Greece, and holding Aly in contempt (στὸν νούν- 
του δὲν τὸν (aver) orders all the Gkégkidhes to assemble at 
Okhri. Although the people of Okhri receive Mahmiid with 
respect, and bid him welcome, (τοῦ εἴπανε τὸ yooyyedre') he 
imprisons their rich men, seizes their property, and puts some of 
them to death; upon which the people of Okhri petition the 
Sultan, and among other things accuse Mahmud of disloyalty. 


καὶ λέγει ἀπὸ τὸ βασιλιὰ ταφτίτον δὲν ὑδρώνει" 
ἀμὰν ἐφέντη βασιλιᾶ νὰ μᾶς ἐλενθερώσῃς. 
ee ~ , ~ \ Χ \ δώ 
τὴν Οχρι τοῦ Σκόντρα πασιᾶ νὰ μὴ τὴν παραδώσῃς. 


“He says that for the king (Sultan) his ear does not sweat : 
Mercy, my lord king, and liberate us, 
And deliver not up Okhri to the Skodra-Pasha.” 


Upon receiving these complaints, the Sultan confers the Der- 
venia upon Aly Pasha, and directs him to expel Mahmid from 
Okhri ’. 

In addition to the 10,000 Toskidhes he has with hin, he col- 
lects 1000 Tzamidhes of the troops of Mahmud Daliani, and 
marching to Okhri, enters the town, cuts off a thousand heads, 
and takes 2000 prisoners. Mahmtd demands a cessation of 
arms, and in the night effects a retreat on the road to Skodra. 
Aly, at the entreaty of his own army, spares 300 of the prisoners, 
and leaves them in possession of their arms. The rest he be- 
heads, and sends their heads to Constantinople. 

The Sultan, on hearing that Aly has put things in order at 
Okhri, sends a φερμάνι χάτι χουμαγιοῦν ἧ, appointing him to the 


1 Hosh Gheldi, T. welcome. advances to power. 
2 It was to check the two other 3 Fermahn Hati Humayin, T. a 


great chieftains of Albania, that the sublime written decree. 
Porte encouraged Aly in his first 


472 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


government of loannina, and reminds him that the Dervénia 
were conferred upon him for the satety of the Rayas. 


~ ͵ 
καὶ τὰ ντερβένια σοὔστειλα ᾿Αλήμου νὰ περάσῃς 


har ae ~ > ε \ ! εν - 
yeare ὁ paytac EOKOPTLOE va στείλῃς να τὸν paone. 


“1 sent you the Dervénia, my Aly, to traverse, 
Because the Rayas had dispersed, and that you might send 
and collect them.” 


ravra—«at ripage καλὰ ᾿Αλῆ πασιᾶ παιδίμου 
νά μή κλαυθῃ κάνας ῥαγιᾶς, νὰ ἔχῃς τὴν εὐχήμου. 
σὰν πάει στήν "Οχρη ᾿Αλῆ πασιᾶς καὶ τόδοσε γνιζάμι 
δύσι καὶ ὅλη ἡ ᾿Αραπὶα τοῦτ᾽ ἄκουσαν το κάμῃ. 
“‘ These—and look to it, Aly Pasha, my son, 
That no Raya complains—you have my prayer. 
When Aly Pasha went to Okhri, and put it in order, 
The West and all Arabia heard what he had done.” 


He now proceeds to Ioannina, where the Beys tremble at his 
approach, but hide their arms and their power. They go out to 
meet and receive him, but their hearts are cold (μὲ τὴν καρδιά 
τους κρύα). 

He summons Beys, Kadis, and Agas before him, threatens 
them with death if they continue to oppress the poor, and forbids 
their wearing arms. 

He distributes governments to his faithful Toskidhes, and be- 
gins to construct a palace at Ioannina, the magnificence of which 
the poet declares himself unable to describe. 

Here the Pasha enjoys himself in repose: all Rumili kneels 
down before him and kisses his sock, while he thinks of the 
piece of sixty paras with which he began. 

᾿Αρβανιτιὰ καὶ ἹΡούμηλη ταῖς δένει μὲ Eva ῥάμμα, 
ὁ λύκος καὶ τὸ πρόβατο τὰ δύο βόσκουν ἀντάμα. 

** Albania and Rumili he ties together with a thread: 
The wolf and the lamb both feed together.”’ 


ὅλος ὁ κόσμος γιούρτισε κιόλα τὰ βιλαέτια 
καὶ φέρνουν στὸν "Af πασιᾶ φλωριὰ * μὲ τὰ σεπέτια 
1 φλωρὶα. Φλωρὶ, this word was _ rence, but is now applied to all gold 


probably first introduced into the coin. 
language with the gold coin of Flo- 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 473 


ὥρα τὴν ὥρα ᾿Αλῆ πασιᾶς dkdpe πλειὸ βαρένει, 
τὸ ὄνομάτου εἰκούσθηκε στὸ Ἥντε στὸ Τεμένι, 
δ" 6 , , ° [4 \9 tA 
σεφτὰ ῥηγάτα Φράγγικα ἀκούσθη τὸ ’voparov, 
\ 
κανένας wo τὰ σήμερα δὲν στάθηκε μπροστάτου. 


“Α1] the world made festivities, and all the districts : 
They bring Aly Pasha golden coins and coffers. 
Hour by hour Aly Pasha weighs more heavy : 

His name is heard in Hind, in Yemen, 
In the Seven Frank Kingdoms his name is heard ; 
And no one to this day hath stood before him.” 


The Sultan now goes to war with the German—(éyer σεφέρι μὲ 
τὸν Νέμιτζα.) And orders the Rumili Valesi, or Governor- 
General of Rumelia, (ὁ ‘Povpedne,) to the defence of Belgrade, 
where the army of the Kiafér (infidel) had crossed the Duna, 
(Danube,) and taken the fort of Kulak Kalé. The Rimelis 
pitches his camp thirty hours distant from the enemy. But 
nevertheless, 


kal τοῦ γράφει τοῦ βασιλιᾶ πούρθα στὸ Μπελιγράτι, 
= S' 74 , ~ 4 \ , ΄ 
καὶ τζάκισα τοῦ Νέμιτζα τὰ κόκκαλα κομμάτι. 


‘“* He writes to the Sultan—I am arrived at Belgrade, 
And have broken the German’s bones a little.”’ 


He recommends at the same time that Aly Pasha should be 
sent to his assistance, who, receiving a firmahn accordingly, 
leaves a Vekil and body of troops at Ioannina, and marches to 
the frontier. The Rumelis, on his arrival, takes courage, and 
encamps nearer to Belgrade. 

They invest the Kulak Kalé. Aly, with his own troops, 
takes the castle, puts half the garrison to the sword, sends the 
other half to Constantinople, then crosses the Danube and takes 
4000 prisoners, male and female, (σκλάβους καὶ σκλάβαις,) and 
on the credit of his success writes to the Porte, requesting leave 
to return home. 


καὶ τώρα μοῦ προβόδισε ὁ τόποσμου ἀρζουχάλι, 
τὸ Κακοσούλι μοῦγραφαν πῶς σύκωσε κεφάλι. 


474 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


‘**‘ My place has now sent me a petition : 
They have written to me how Kako Suli has raised its 
head.” 


The Porte complies with his request, but directs him to leave 
his troops behind. 

On his arrival at Io4nnina, he orders the assemblage of fresh 
forces from the Sanjak of Délvino, from Dagho, and from Para- 
kélamo, to assist him against the Din-dushman, or enemy of the 
faith, as he now designates the Suliotes. 

The poet then introduces the mention and praise of Aly’s two 
sons, Mukhtar and Vely, now become Pashas of two tails, and 
then describes the defeat of the former at Suli (in the year 
1792), which he attributes to the treachery of the Tzamidhes. 
Aly prepares to punish them accordingly; but on their send- 
ing messengers to appease him, he dissembles his resentment, 
offers their soldiers double pay, and augurs victory to their 
future efforts. 


i? ΄ Ἂ \ t ΄ 
σήμερα χαλασθήκαμε, ταχυ θὲ νά νικήσω, 
στὸ Σούλι τὸν καλόγερον ἐγὼ θὲ νὰ τὸν ψήσω. 


** To-day we have been ruined; to-morrow I shall conquer : 
At Suli the monk? I will roast.” 


To secure their future fidelity, he requires their chiefs to send 
their children as hostages to Ioannina. Ibrahim Demis, of 
Filiates, and several others, and even Prénio and Tzapari, 
comply with these terms. Thus strengthened, he meditates the 
reduction of the maritime Kidfa’ (Κιάφα τοῦ Τιαλοῦ). Having 
represented to the Porte that the Christians of that district are 
rebellious; that they refuse to pay the Kharatj, and that they 
have taken possession of the harbours (oxadwpara) for their own 
benefit, he receives from the Sultan, together with the annual 
confirmation of the government of Délvino, permission to punish 


1 The Papas Samuel, who already part of the district of Délvino, lying 
began to make himself conspicuous between Vutzintré and Khimara. 
for his courage and perseverance. Nivitza and St. Basil are the prin- 

2 So called to distinguish it from cipal villages. 

Kiafa of Suli, It is the maritime 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 475 


the rebellious Christians, if they refuse to submit peaceably to 
his authority. 
The people of Kiafa are alarmed. 


\ 7 ? J \ , e oo , 
καὶ τώρα ἐτρομάξανε καὶ φρίξαν οἱ καὐμένοι 
γιατάκουσαν στὸ Χόρμοβο τὶ θρῆνος εἴχε γένη, 
τῆς Μαλισόβας τάκουσαν τὰ μαῦρα τὰ μαντάτα 
- \ 3 7 \ ΄ \ ᾿ A 
ποῦ δὲν ἀπόμεινε ψυχὴ μήτε σκυλὶ καὶ γάτα, 
καὶ κεῖνοι συλλογίσθηκαν στὸ Φράγκο νὰ χωθοῦνε 
\ \ Ν ’ ~ ~ \ ‘ ~ 
καὶ στὸ σπαθὶ τ᾽ αλῆ πασιᾶ νὰ μὴ παραδοθοῦνε. 


** And now they trembled and shivered the wretches, 
For they had heard at Khormovo what lamentations had taken 
place, 
Of Malisova they had heard the black news, 
Where there remained not a soul, nor a dog, nor a cat, 
They thought of hiding themselves with the Frank, 
And to the sword of Aly Pasha not to yield.” 


Kalafiz (an officer of Aly) enters the country, sword in hand, 
and occupies all the villages. The Pasha thought at first 
of putting all the people to the sword, but instead of that, he 
sends 1000 families to the plains of Trikkala to cultivate his 
lands, and to build farm-houses (παλάγγαις) for themselves. 

Aly then visits the coast near the Vivari (Vutzintro), from 
whence he sends a letter to Corfa, inviting the French governor 
to a feast and conference. The invitation is accepted in the 
person of General Rosa (ὁ PéZoc). After dinner Aly inquires 
the news from Paris, when Rosa tells the Pasha that Paris (τὸ 
Παρίσι, i.e. the French government) has bought all Rumili as 
far as Edrené (Adrianople) of the Sultan, that in the approach- 
ing spring he (Rosa) is to take possession of it; that he will 
make Aly a king, or give him Venice if he should desire it. 


ὁ πονηρὸς ᾿Αλῆ πασιᾶς σφαλάει THY καρδιάτου 
καὶ ὁ Ῥόζος ὁ περίφανος ἁπλώθηκε μπροστάτου. 


“« The crafty Aly Pasha shuts up his heart, 
And the haughty Rosa was opened before him.” 


Aly pretends to enter into the scheme, agrees to abandon his 
own territories, and the Sultan’s cause, on condition of receiving 
20,000 purses, without requiring either Venice or Ioannina. 


13 


476 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


On Rosa’s return to Corff, two ships are sent to Arta as a 
present to Aly. The Pasha, alarmed at what he has heard, 
transmits the intelligence to the Sultan, and to the Vezir of the 
Seal (τῆς βοῦλας τὸν Βεζύρην), with the additional information 
that Bonaparte (Mirovaecemea) is preparing in France an expe- 
dition against Rumili. 

The Porte in its reply assures Aly that there is no fear for the 
present: that the French have lost their wits at home, have the 
other six Frank kingdoms to contend with; and are many of 
them flying to Constantinople for protection; finally, recom- 
mending him to attend to the concerns of his government and 
keep the Raya contented. 

Aly exclaims on receiving this answer,— 


χαΐρι dev ἔχομε μεῖς φέτο ἀπ᾽ τὸ ντοβλέτι. 
“6 have no satisfaction this year from the government.” 
va ξέρετε μᾶς μάγεψαν τῆς Φραντζας οἱ διαβόλοι, 
καὶ γνῶσι δὲν ἀπόμεινε τοῦ βασιλιᾶ στὴν Μπόλι. 


“ς Know that the devils of France have enchanted us, 
And no sense has remained in the King at Constantinople.” 


οἱ γνωστικοὶ ποῦ βρίσκονται στὴν Μπόλι δὲν κοτοῦνε, 
, ‘ Ν - ~ - 
τὸν κιὸρ βεζίρη σκιάζονται va wave νὰ τοῦ εϊποῦνε, 
- - - \ 
τοῦ κιὸρ βεζίρη νὰ τοῦ ποῦν τὰ πάτα νὰ ξετάσῃ, 
- ~ ‘ 7 \ ῇ \ \ A 
πρῶτα κιαρχῆς TOY κούσουλα pe ξύλα va τὸν κάψη. 


‘ 


σι 


The knowing ones at Constantinople dare not, 

And are afraid of going to tell the blind Vezir’, 

To tell the blind Vezir to examine affairs to the bottom, 

And first of all to burn the Consul (Ambassador) with wood.” 


Aly therefore, notwithstanding the letter of the Sultan collects 
his forces, and makes his Hasnadar (treasurer) Yussaf, surnamed 
Arapi, or the Black, his Vekil (deputy) in the command of 
24,000 men. 


ς “ὃ ~ . » e ἣν Σ - 
οἱ μπεῖδες τῆς Povupedne ὅλοι τὸν προσκυνοῦνε, 
τὸ μαῦρο χέρι τοῦ λαλάτου τὸ γλυκοφιλοῦνε, 
> ~ εἶ 
ὄντες νὰ βγῆ στὰ Τρίκαλα οἱ κλέφταις τὸ μαθένουν, 


4 / “ ᾽ 
πηγένουν στάγρια τὰ βουνὰ σχίζουν τὴ γῆν καὶ μπέγνουν, 


1 Yussif Pasha, who had lost an eye. 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 477 
καὶ ora ντερβένια πουθενὰ δὲν βρίσκονται ζορμπάδες, 


a } i \ Ἢ ,ὔ ᾽ / λ (ὃ 
ar τὸ σπαθὶ rove πέρασε ἀμέτρηταις χιλιαόες. 


* The Beys of Rumili all worship him, 
The black hand of the Pasha’s foster-father they sweetly kiss. 
When the thieves learn that he has proceeded to Trikkala, 
They go into the wild mountains, they open the earth and 
enter into it, 
In the Dervents robbers are no where found, 
He has slaughtered unnumbered thousands of them.” 


4. ἔν \ ΄ δε N , > “ 
ακόμι καὶ στασκέριτου αὐτὸς δίνει ἰσάπι, 
~ ~ \ \ ~ \ ͵ 
᾿Αλῆ πασιᾶς δὲν τὸν ρὡτᾶ τὶ κάνεις μωρὲ ᾿Αράπη. 


“ΟΥ̓ the army also he gives account (has the direction), 
Nor does Aly Pasha ask him, what are you doing, fellow Arab.” 


Exactly at this time Aly receives a firmahn, ordering him to 
march against Pasvan Oglu’ (IlacGdy-oydov), and to command 
the forces which are to blockade Vidin (Βιντένι) by land; while 
Husséin Kapitan Pasha is to ascend the Danube with a fleet: 
“ἴον Pasvan-oglu,” adds the firmahn, ‘‘ and those who obey 
him on the Danube are rebellious. He keeps the miri in his 
hands, acknowledges neither king, nor firmahn, neither kadi, nor 
mufti, and exacts double kharatj from the Raya.” Aly is dis- 
satisfied with the firmahn; nevertheless, leaving his two sons 
and Yussif Arapi with 5000 men, he marches with 20,000 to 
Vidin. 

Husséin Pasha gives Aly the chief command of the blockading 
army, with twenty-four Pashas under him. Pasvan-oglu sends 
a message to Aly, protesting himself a loyal subject,—that he 
never kept back the miri, that he is ready to have his conduct 


1 The real motive of Pasvan- 
oglu’s rebellion, and which he could 
not have avoided without resigning 
his power, was the opposition of the 
Janissaries of the northern frontier 
to the Nizam Djedid, by which new 
taxes were imposed, to support cer- 
tain unpopular changes in the ad- 
ministration and army. The model- 
ling of the latter on the European 


plan, and the abolition of the Janis- 
saries, was the object of the whole 
measure. The oppression of the 
Raya is always an article of accusa- 
tion against a governor in disgrace: 
whence it appears that the Porte is 
unable, rather than unwilling, to 
protect the Christians, whose peti- 
tions on such occasions are generally 
received with attention, 


478 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


fairly judged, but that being attacked, he is determined to fight ; 
finally he remarks to Aly, 


σήμερα εἶν᾽ ὁ γάμοσμου, ταχὺ εἶναι δικόσου. 
“ς It is my marriage to-day : it will be yours to-morrow.” 


And hints that the object of the Porte in sending Aly to Vidin is, 
καὶ σεῖς καὶ μεῖς va πέσωμε στὴν ντοῦνα νὰ πνιγοῦμε. 


“Ταῦ both you and I may be drowned in the Danube.” 


Aly acknowledges in reply, that it is not a time for them to 
quarrel and fight. 
ὁ Mrovardprec χαίρεται ἡμεῖς va σκοτωθοῦμε, 
ὁ ντιν-ντουσμάνης χαίρεται καὶ τὰ φτεράτου ἀπλώνει, 
καὶ τὰ δικάτου σύνορα πολὺ τὰ δυναμώνει' 
ὡς τόσο μπρὲ Πασβάντογλου ἐγὼ θά πολεμήσω, 
τὸ κάστροσου μουχασερὲ ἐγὼ θὲ νὰ τὸ κλείσω 
καὶ βάσταξε τὸ κάστροσου καὶ ῥάγι μὴ μᾶς δίνε. 
** Bonaparte rejoices that we slaughter one another : 
The enemy of the faith rejoices and stretches out his wings, 
And he strengthens powerfully his own frontiers by it. 
But friend Pasvan-oglu I shall fight, 
I shall besiege your castle with all my forces, 
So defend well your castle and give us no peace.” 


For three months Vidin is blockaded. 

Pasvan-oglu secretly advises Aly to keep his troops out of the 
range of fire, but Aly refuses ; and again recommends him to hold 
out, if he wishes to save his head, and not to trust even his own 
mother; meantime, writes a petition to the Porte in favour of 
the rebellious chieftain, representing his penitence, zeal, and 
bravery, and advising his being sent to fight against the real 
enemies of Turkey. 

Rosa passes over to Iodnnina, explains to the Archons Bona- 
parte’s designs for delivering the Greeks, and tries to form a party 
among them’. But the Archons rejecting his overtures, he re- 
turns to Corfa, sends 3000 French troops to Prévyza, where they 


1 At this time the French Egyp- Bonaparte had published his cele- 
tian armament was at Malta, and brated manifesto to the Greeks. 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 479 


are received with great joy, and 1000 to the Vivari (Vutzindré), 
and endeavours by his agents to excite the Greeks to insur- 
rection. 

Mukhtar causes a report to be spread that Aly Pasha is about 
to return, and the Tzamidhes close their ports (σκαλώματα) 
against the French; upon which the French send an insolent re- 
monstrance to them, and advise them not to resist the arms of 
that nation, which had conquered Arabia (Egypt) and all the 
deserts. 


ποῦ ζάπωσε τὴν ᾿Αραπιὰ Kiddo τὸ τζολοστάνι. 
They reply in a high tone,— 


ὅλοι οἱ Φραντζέζοι νάρθουνε καὶ τὰ ἑπτά ῥηγάτα 
ἄν ἔλθουν στὴν ᾿Αρβανιτιὰ ποτὲ δὲν βρίσκουν στράτα. 


** Let all the French come, and the seven kingdoms ; 
Let them come into Albania: they will never find a road 
there *.” 


In great alarm, however, they apply to Ioannina for council and 
aid ; upon which Mukhtar Pasha and the Despot (metropolitan 
bishop) of Grevena write to Aly to acquaint him that Parga and 
Prévyza are in a state of insurrection, and that even at Arta many 
Greeks have assumed the French cockade’. 

Aly transmits the intelligence to Constantinople, from whence 
he receives directions to return to Ioannina to fortify that place, 
and to chastize Prévyza. 

Ordering a large body of troops to follow him, he performs a 
month’s journey in ten days, enters Ioannina secretly, has an in- 
terview with his two sons and Yusstf the Black, and, having left 
orders with them for throwing an entrenchment round the city, 
he mounts his horse for Filiates, from whence he sends over to 
Corfa requesting a meeting with General Rosa, whom he reminds 
of their interview of the preceding year, with the assurance that 
he is ready to adhere to what was then agreed upon. He adds, 
that it was the Sultan’s intentions in sending him to Vidin to 


1 A common boast of the Alba- well as to furnish a plausible ground 
nians. for requesting the Porte to put an end 

2 This is said to have been a ma- ᾿ ὀὀἰ[ο the war with Pasvan-oglu, or at 
noeuvre of Aly, in order to ascertain _least to allow Aly himself to return 
the extent of the Greek defection, as home. 


480 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


destroy him; that the Turks had attacked and massacred his 
Albanians; that he had effected his escape by the assistance of 
two friends, but that the Turks were in close pursuit of him; 
finally, requesting Rosa to afford him refuge, to send troops to 
occupy Ioannina, and to come over himself to Filiates instead of 
Hexamili (where they had met before), because near the latter 
place his subjects are in rebellion against him. 

Rosa, upon receiving this letter, flatters himself that he has 
got Aly into his power, and crosses over immediately to 
Tzamuria. 

Aly begins by dissembling and affecting great humility (éyi- 
vnke μικρότερος); but soon changes his tone; inquires whether it 
is true that Bonaparte has disembarked in Egypt (βγῆκε στὸ 
Μισήρι); reproaches Rosa with his deceit (γιατήσαι ψεύστης 
φίλεμου); asks him where are the promised 20,000 purses; why 
he sent troops to Prévyza and the Vivari; why the two vessels 
which had been presented to him were taken away again; and 
ends by sending him to Ioannina as a present (πισκέσι) to his son 
Mukhtar Pasha, who gives him over to the Bulu-bashi (Μπλοῦ- 
μπαση) to be imprisoned. The poet then breaks out into a strain 
of true Musulman insolence against the fallen Frank. 

War being declared against the French, Aly sends troops to the 
Vivari, orders Mukhtar Pasha to meet him with his forces at Luro, 
writes to the Prévyzans that he has a firmahn of the Porte to 
make them Rayas, and orders them to deliver up the French 
troops to him: promising that if they do so, and submit to pay 
the Kharatj, they shall be left in their town, and no Turk shall 
live there. 

He observes,— 


κεφάλι kal δὲν κόβεται ποτὲ προσκυνημένο. 
‘‘ The submitted head is never cut off.” 
Otherwise,— 
τὶ τὸ δικόμου τὸ σπαθὶ ῥαγιάδες δὲν λυπᾶται, 
καὶ σκλάβοι στὴν ᾿ΔΑρβανιτιὰ ὅλοισας θὲ νὰ πᾶτε. 
ρ 
‘** My sword has no compassion for Rayas : 


You shall be made slaves, and sent away into Albania.” 


The Prévyzans, nevertheless, return an answer of defiance, 
trusting in great measure to the assistance of Suli. 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. - 481 


κείνη τὴν ὥρα ἤρθανε οἱ σκοτεινοὶ Σουλιώταις 
καὶ τοῦ ἔπιασαν ταῖς δημοσιαῖς ταῖς στράταις καὶ ταῖς πόρταις. 
“Αἱ that time came the crafty Suliotes 
And seized the highways and the passes.” 


eixe Eva φίλο ᾿Αλῆ Πασιᾶς καὶ τοῦ doce χαμπέρι, 
Κακοσουλιώταις covKapay ἕνα μέγα καρτέρι. 
“«(Β00) Aly Pasha had a friend, who gave him the intelligence 
That the Kako Suliotes were making a great ambuscade.” 


He advances, and orders Mukhtar, with 1000 men, to attack 
the left of the enemy’s position at Paledkastro (Nicopolis ), 
while he himself occupies, with the remaining forces, a height 
opposite to the enemy’s right. 

οἱ Φράγκοι τὸ Παλιόκαστρον μὲ τόπια τὸ εἶχαν κλείσῃ 

Φράγκοι καὶ κλέπταις καὶ ῥαγιᾶς τὸ κάστρο τὸ εἶχαν κλείσῃ 
καὶ βάνουν στό παλιόκαστρο τόπια καὶ κουμπαράδες. 

“The Franks the Palidkastro with guns had surrounded ; 

Franks, and robbers, and the Raya’, the castle had enclosed : 
They put cannons and mortars into the Paliokastro.” 


They believe that Aly Pasha has 5000 men, but his whole 
force is only 1600 horse and foot (καβάλα καὶ πεζούρα). 

Mukhtar having met with some resistance, his father advances 
to his aid. They soon carry the Paleokastro, and put every man 
found in it to the sword. From thence they advance to the town of 
Prévyza, where Aly shows no mercy. 


᾿Αλῆ Πασιᾶς στὴν Πρέβεζα τέτοιο νιζάμι δίνει" 
κόβει κορμιὰ, πέρνει ψυχαῖς, δὲν κάμνει λεημοσύνη, 
περίσιαις σκλάβαις ἔπηραν κορίτζια καὶ νυφάδες, 
καὶ στέλνει στὴν ᾿Αρβανιτιὰ ἀμέτρηταις χιλιάδες" 
πολλαῖς μανάδες χώρισαν ἀπό τούς πατεράδες 
καὶ ταῖς πουλοῦν στά Γιάνενα ὡσὰν τοὺς ᾿Αραπάδες. 
** Such is the manner in which Aly Pasha orders Prévyza : 


He cuts bodies, takes away souls, and gives no mercy, 
They took many girls and young married women ; 


1 The Franks were French; the by the Raya the poet means the 
robbers, the rebellious Greek moun- _— Prevyzans. 
taineers who had joined the French ; 


VOL. I. 1 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


And he sends unnumbered thousands into Albania. 
Many mothers they separated from fathers, 
And sold them at Ioannina like negro slaves.” 


Some of the French embarked, and attempted to escape by sea, 
but were drowned on the shallows. 


καὶ ἡ κλεφτουριὰ τῆς Ρούμελης ὅσοι ἤρθανε καὶ μπῆκαν 
σὰν τὰ σφακτὰ στὸ χασαπιὸ στὰ ζῶντατους γδαρθῆκαν. 
‘“‘The robbers of Rumili, who came and entered Prévyza, 
Were flayed alive, like cattle at the butchery.” 


1000 heads* are sent to Constantinople, and 300 French 
prisoners, with Rosa to command them (νὰ τοῦς κοὐμανταρί ση). 

Having left a garrison in Prévyza, Aly returns to Ioannina, 
where he is saluted by the titles of Mubarék and Ghazi (fortu- 
nate and victorious), and receives from the Porte the third horse- 
tail, the sword, and kaftan (robe of honour), with orders to attend 
to the defence of his own government, to construct a fortress at 
Joannina, and to assist Kadri Bey, whose squadron is sent 


against Corfu. 


Aghia Mavra, Vonitza, and Parga, dreading the fate of Pré- 


1 The 1000 heads is a poetical 
amplification. Of 175 inhabitants of 
Prévyza, who were taken in the 
place and accused of having abetted 
the French, three only were saved. 
The heads of the Prevyzans, and 
those of the Greeks and French 
killed at Nécopolis, amounting to 
300, were sent to Constantinople. 
By heads is to be understood the 
skins only, which are stuffed with 
straw and moistened before they are 
presented to the Grand Vezir. The 
property of many of the Prevyzans 
who took no active part in the war 
was seized by Aly, on pretence of 
their having aided the French, their 
lands given to Albanians, and their 
families sent to cultivate some waste 
but fertile lands on the borders of the 
Ambracic Gulf, where the Pasha 


s 

built huts and formed tjiftliks. The 
poet has been silent as to the aid 
afforded to Aly on this occasion by 
his old adversary Hassan Tzapari, 
and the other Tzamidhes, many of 
whom were Christians. Some of 
these seized and carried with them 
into Tzamuria, as a great prize, a 
thaumaturgous picture of St. Kharaé- 
lambo ("Aytoc Χαράλαμπος), the 
patron of Prévyza. The priests of 
his church made large offers to 
obtain its restoration, but without 
success; and the subsequent misfor- 
tunes of Prévyza, particularly the 
alienation of the lands, and the 
building of a mosque, were gene- 
rally attributed by the Prevyzans, 
particularly by the priests and 
women, to the loss of the protect- 
ing picture, 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 483 


vyza, petition Kadri Bey, that Aly may not be permitted to 
molest them. By his mediation they are left in tranquillity. 


~ ἈΝ 
ἐπῆγε πέρα στοὺς ἹΚορφοὺς ἡ Τουρκικὴ ἀρμάτα 
\ ~ ay ~ Ἁ >" \ , 
καὶ τοῦ Φραντζέζου τοῦ δωκαν τὴ σκοτεινὴ τὴ στράτα, 
τ Ὁ 72 e \ \ z ΄ 
καὶ ἀπομείναν οἱ Κορφοὶ σὰν ἦταν μαθημένοι 
πῶς ἦταν στὸν παλιὸ καιρὸ στὸ βασιλιᾶ γραμμένοι. 


‘The Turkish fleet went over to Οοτά Ὁ, 
And gave the dark road to the Frenchman ; 
And Corfi remained as it was formerly accustomed to be, 
As it was in the ancient time written with’ the king.” 


ὁ Βεζίρης (the Vezir)* now prepares to attack ἹΚακοσούλι, 
moves from Ioannina, takes Lipa‘, and blockades Suli on every 
side, which alarms the Tz4midhes and Ibrahim Pasha of Berat 
so much, that an alliance is formed, consisting of Ibrahim, 
Mustafa Pasha, Selim Bey of Délvino, Mahmit Dalidni of Ko- 
nispoli, Premedi, and the districts of Dagho and Parakalamo in 


Tzamuria. 


ακόμι ἐπροβόδισε χαρτιὰ στὸ Kaxoooun 
ἐφέτο τούτη τὴ χρονιὰ Eva νὰ γενωμούλοιδ. 


““ (Ibrahim) sent also letters to Kakosili: 
Let us this year become one.” 


And among other things, observes to the allies,— 


~ \ , ~ , πον 
πρῶτα στὸ Σούλι πολεμᾶ ταγγίστριτου νὰ ῥίξῃ 
καὶ ὕστερα τὴν Tlapovpyid στὴ λίμνη νὰ τὴν πνίξῃ 
7 
τιράγει καὶ στὸ Ντέλβινο vd βάνη τὸ ποδάρι 


ay ΄ \ A , \ , \ a ΄ 
ν᾽ ἀπλώσῃ καὶ τὸ χέριτου τὴ Βλόρα νὰ μοῦ παρη. 


1 Not a word is here said of the 3 By the third tail Aly obtained 
Russian armament, without which _ this rank. 
the Turkish would have had little 4 Anza, one of the chief villages 
hope of reducing the Seven Islands. of the Suliote confederacy, in the 
? A common expression in Turk- mountains between Suli and Ioan- 
ish for subjects. By the treaty of nina. 
1800, establishing the Septinsular 5 γένωμεν ὕλοι. 


Republic, an annual tribute was to 
be paid to the Porte. 


| ae 


484 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


First, upon Suli he labours to throw his hook, 
And afterwards Tzamuria to drown in the lake’. 
He looks into Délvino to set his foot, 

To stretch out his hand, and take Vliéra from me.” 


He hints also at Aly’s great credit at the Porte. 


x 4 ‘\ 
τὶ τώρα ζύγωσε πολὺ ἀπάνω στὸ ντοβλέτι 


καὶ μᾶς ποτίζει σήμερα φαρμακερὸ σερμπέτι. 


“ For he has much weight aloft at the government, 
And this day gives us a poisonous sherbet to drink.” 


The (Mahometan) chiefs of Tzamuria and Darvano’, who unite 
with Ibrahim, make peace with the Suliotes who send hostages 
to Delvino. But the allies endeavour in vain to gain over Mah- 
mid Sekhmét, commander of the Castle of Délvino; they blockade 
him therefore with troops from Konispoli, Sulates, Gardhiki, and 
Darvano. At the end of two months Mahmud capitulates, on 
condition of retiring to Nivitza, when they burn all his houses, 
and those of his adherents at Délvino. 

The Vezir divides his forces into three parts, one is left before 
Suli, another is sent into Tzamuria, the third against Délvino: 
Vely Pasha is sent against Ibrahim. 


\ , \ \ ΄ ͵ \ ͵ 
στὸν πεθερότου θεὲ va πάῃ καίχει ντροπὴ μεγάλη. 
\ ~ 
ὡς τόσο Ovo δὲν γίνεται 6 λόγος τοῦ πατρόστου 


\ \ \ , 9 Ἅ i \ , 
καὶ Oe νὰ πάῃ ἀπάνωτου ac ἦν καὶ πεθερόστου. 


“He will go against his father-in-law though he has great 
shame (very reluctantly ) ; 
But his father’s word does not become two (is not to be 
contradicted ), 
And he must go against him, though he be his father- 
in-law.” 


Vely marches to K6nitza, where, not finding any symptoms 
of opposition, he falls upon the villages of Bala, and moves for- 
ward to Toziani, where Ibrahim’s troops had shut themselves 


1 Drowning in the lake was so 2 The country northward of Para- 
common a punishment at Ioannina kaélamo comprising Délvino. 
that it became a figure of speech. 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 485 
up. He refuses their request of being allowed to retire unmo- 
lested, unless they give up their arms; they resolve to resist. 
Vely enters the place sword in hand. Some of Ibrahim’s troops 
escape, and some are slain or taken. Among the prisoners are 
found the tevabs, or securities of the Suliote alliance, who had 
deserted from Ioannina. These are put to death to the number 
of fifty-two. 

Ibrahim sends a submissive message to his son-in law, who at 
first refuses all accommodation, but afterwards consents to eva- 
cuate Téziani, on the condition that Ibrahim abandons his alli- 
ance with Délvino and Suli. Meantime, Aly has received the 
appointment of Rumili Valesi, with orders to proceed against the 
Haidé’*. He forwards the news to his son— 


᾿Αλῆ Πασιᾶς προβόδισε χαμπέρι τοῦ Βελίκου ὃ. 


And orders him to make peace with Ibrahim and return to Ioan- 
nina. 

He then sends reinforcements to Mahmtd Sekhmét Aga at 
Nivitza, and directs him to demand the keys of the castle of Dél- 
vino from the Gardhikiotes, who occupied it, allowing them to 
depart unmolested on the condition of delivering up to Aly the 
Suliote hostages, who were also in the castle, and two of whom 
were men of note. 

The Gardhikiotes comply. Aly then sends Malio Metzo ὅ to 
command at Délvino, and takes Sekhmét with him into Rumili, 
where he is directed by the Porte to put all things in order as far 
as Adrianople, and to proceed, sword in hand, against Osman 
Pasha, the Georgian, who with the Haidé is opposing Aki 
Pasha near Adrianople. 

The Vezir collects his troops at Bunila*, (Μπουνίλα,) leaves 


1 Haidé, or Haitali, here written 
χάϊντες and αἱνταλίδες is the name 
given by the Turks to the rebellious 
inhabitants of the mountains on 
either side of the valley of the 
Hebrus, who in union generally 
with some Albanian adventurers, 
have often disturbed the tranquillity 
of Rumili, and rendered the roads 


insecure. 

2 Βελίκος, the χαϊδευτικὸν, or 
term of endearment for Vely. 

3 Otherwise called Metzobono, 
an Albanian officer in great favour 
with Aly. 

4 A tjiftlik, and military depét, 
two miles south of Ioannina. 


486 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


Mukhtar in command at Ioannina, and moves out of the town 


in state. 


owt, 


δεξιὰ στέκονται σέχιδες, ζερβὰ οἱ ἀφεντάδες, 


5 4 
διαβάζοντας τὸ ἀλκουρὰν καὶ μὲ πολλοὺς ντοβάδες, 


‘ 
νά πάῃ καλὰ στὴ ‘Povpedn καὶ πίσω va γυρίσῃ. 


* * 


* 


ΝΥ ᾽’ > sy A oh \ > f 
καὶ τρέχανε ATO κοντὰ σπαΐδες καὶ ἀγάδες, 


πέρασε ἀπ’ τὰ Τρεβενὰ καὶ πάει στὸ Μοναστήρι, 


ἄνδρες γυνᾶικες βγήκανε νὰ ἐιδοῦνε τὸν βεζίρη. 


“ΟΠ his right hand stand the Sheikhs, on the left 


Efféndis ’, 


the 


Reading the Alkoran with many prayers, 
That he may have success in Rumili and return home. 


* 


* 


Spahis and Agas ran beside him : 
He passed by Grevena to Monastir : 
Men and women came out to see the Vezir.” 


From Monastir he sends a threatening message to two rebel 
chiefs who were at the head of 12,000 men. 


Χαλίλι καὶ Χαραφεϊζῆ στὴν κόρδαμου σᾶς βάνω, 


πρέπει νὰ προσκυνήσετε πρὸ τοῦ νὰ χαλασθῆτε,᾽ 


τὶ ἄλλο τζαρὲ δὲν ἔχετε στὰ χέριαμου θὰ μπῆτε. 


“ Khalil and Karafeizi ", I will place you in my bow-string : 
You must make the act of submission that you may not be 


ruined ; 


For you have no other means, but must fall into my hands.” 


They reply, that they wish to find some good opportunity of 
submitting, (va προσκυνήσουν,) upon which Aly moves from 
Monastir, pitches his camp at Sofia, accepts the submission of 


1 agevradec—Effendis. This is 
one of the few words of Greek origin 
which have been naturalized among 
the Turks, who, in this instance as 
in general, soften the sound of 
their borrowed words; the Greeks 


‘ 


still say aiSévrn, or ἀφέντη, for 
master, lord. 

2 Karafeizi, (black-cap,) an Al- 
banian freebooter, whose real name 
the poet has not given. 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 487 


the two chieftains, and proceeds to Felibé, (Philippopolis,) and 
summons Tjurtji Osman, who was at the head of 42,000 men. 
As 10,000 of these were under Abd-ul-Tjami, (Αὐτουλτζάμι,) 
and 12,000 under Musli-Gkeka, (Μουσληγκέκα,) both Alba- 
nians, as their names indicate, Aly endeavours to gain them 
over. They agree to plunder the Tjurtji Pasha, on the pretext 
of his being indebted to them for the pay of their troops’, and 
having effected this design they offer themselves to Aly Pasha; 
but Musli, who had carried his depredations almost to Constanti- 
nople, and had been denounced by a special fermahn from the 
Sultan, having learnt on his arrival at Felibe that Aly intended 
to put him to death— 


x Ν ,ὔ \ , \ ΄ 
σὰν τὸ πετούμενο πουλὶ ἕξαπέταξε pe Tare 
\ / ‘ ~ \ 7 \ \ x. S / 
δ va Tan va βρῇ τὴν τέχνητου καὶ τὸ παλιὸ ζανάτι. 


‘‘ Like a winged bird fled with his horse, 
To go and find his art and his old profession—(that of a 
robber ). 


A few of his comrades accompany him; but Aly, having sent 
600 men in pursuit of the fugitives, an engagement ensues, in 
which Musli, receiving a wound, falls from his horse, and is taken 
with 200 of those Aintalidhes who had ruined the world (ποῦ 
εἶχαν χαλάση τὸν ντουνιά.) 

Aly beheads Musli, and sends his head to rented: re- 
ceives submission and hostages from the villages, as securities 
against the re-appearance of the robbers; and then, having 
obtained permission from the Porte to return to Ioannina— 


\ , \ , X ἢ 4 1 
και κάθισε OTO TOOTLTOV και κανει τὸ σεφατου. 


‘Sits down in his post, and takes his pleasure.” 


The remainder of the poem relates to the capture of Suli, but 
as these transactions will be found more at length in the abstract 
from the history of Suli and Parga, which forms the subject of the 
Additional Note to Chapter V., it will be sufficient to adda few of 
the passages in which the Mahometan poet has represented matters 


1 It is common among the Alba- themselves: on the allegation, often 
nian mercenaries thus to desert the — well founded, of a failure in the re- 
chief with whom they have engaged _ gular payment of their lufé, or pay. 


488 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 

rather differently from the Christian historian. The Suliotes, 
hearing of the Vezir’s return, collect their scattered forces. They 
reflect that they have no longer any hopes of assistance from 
Délvino or Berat; and that the Vezir has so many securities 
from Prénio and Tzapari in his hands, that these chieftains can- 
not be expected to move in favour of Suli. 


τοὺς ἔδεσε πατοκορφὴ Kal τώρα δὲν τρομοῦνε, 
φοβοῦνται τὰ κεφάλιατους καὶ τώρα δὲ βοηθοῦνε, 

τάχει πιασμένα ᾿Αλῆ Πασιᾶς τά συνοράμας οὕλα 
ὅπου εἶναι τόπος σέρπικος ἔχει φτιασμένη κούλα. 


‘‘ He has bound them foot and head : 
They fear for their heads, and now they will not assist. 
Aly Pasha has taken all our frontiers ; 
Wherever there is a difficult place he has built a tower.” 


Kitzo Bétzari', (KirGoc Μπότζαρης,) one of the chiefs of Suli, 
was living at Ioannina, in a state of pretended submission to the 
Vezir, but secretly corresponding with his countrymen. In > 
reply to their requisitions for a supply of lead and gunpowder, 
he informs them that the Archons of Ioannina have promised 
him to supply these essentials, and at the same time exhorts 
them to be vigilant, as Aly’s camp is ready, and he is bent on 
their destruction. From Parga they receive assurances of sup- 
port, with offers of asylum, in case of disaster; and they are 
joined by sixty-four Christians of Tzamuria, with their women 
and children, and with a large supply of provisions. 


“ The robbers also assembled to defend Suli.”’ 
καὶ ἣ κλεφτουριά 5 μαζώχθηκε στὸ Σούλι va κλεισθοῦνε. 
1 Κίτζος, the χαὶϊδευτικὸν of 


Χρίστος. Soon after the capture 
of Prévyza, George Botzari, the 


reside under his own eye at Ioan- 
nina, as a security for the peaceable 
conduct of the rest of the tribe. 


father of Kitzo, thinking the affairs 
of the confederacy in a desperate 
state, accepted a sum of money from 
Aly, and deserted with all his tribe. 
The Vezir gave them Vurgaréli, a 
village in the district of Tzumérka, 
for their residence; but obliged 
Kitzo, the eldest son of George, to 


George Botzari did not live long 
after his desertion; and Kitzo, at 
the time mentioned in the poem, 
was the head of the house. 

2 ἡ κλεφτουριὰ, means rob- 
bery collectively, or the life of a 
robber, or the country occupied by 
robbers: ἔφυγε στὴν κλεφτουριὰν---- 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 489 


A resolution is taken to destroy the Pasha’s Kules before he 
can arrive with his main body. 

While Khoto Metzikrani, (Χότος Μετζικράνι,) an Albanian, 
who commanded one of those towers, is waiting with fifty men 
to intercept 2000 kuvélia of flour going to Suli, the Suliotes 
send their convoy by another road, and marching to the Kula 
destroy it. 

The Vezir now summons troops in the name of the Porte from 
Berat, Délvino, Dagho, and Parakélamo, orders the Agas of 
Margariti and Paramythia to seize Frari, (@pdpc!,) receives 
from Mustafa Pasha of Délvino his eldest son as a hostage, col- 
lects his forces at Bunila, and gives the conduct of the expedi- 
tion to his son Vely, whom he instructs first to take the town of 
Suli, from thence to proceed against the wild mountains, (ra 
ἄγρια τὰ βουνὰ ",) and then, if the enemy should be willing to 
evacuate the place without battle, to allow them to retire unmo- 
lested to the islands. 


“Ὁ 7, ΄ ι . 9 \ \ ‘ , 

ἂς πάνε μέσα στὴν Φραγγιὰ αὐτοὶ καὶ τὰ παιδιάτους, 

Ν x ~ 
ἂς mave πέρα στοὺς Kopdove καὶ δὼ νὰ μὴ σταθοῦνε, 
κ ~ \ , e/ \ ν ἃ ~ 

va θυμηθοῦν τὸν τόποτους ὅσον καιρὸν Kai ay ζοῦνε, 
νὰ βλέπουνε τὸν τόποτους νὰ καίεται ἡ καρδιάτους, 

ταγρίμια νὰ γυρίζουνε στὰ κρύα τὰ νεράτους. 


“ Let them go into Franghia, they and their children ; 
Let them pass over to Corfi; let them not remain here; 
Let them think of their place (native country) as long as they 
live; 
Let them behold their place (at a distance), and let their hearts 
burn 
To turn the wild animals at their cold waters *.” 


“ He has fled and become a robber’’ 
—a phrase in common use will best 


3 This was precisely what hap- 
pened: the Suliote exiles at Corft 


explain the force of this Romaic 
substantive. 

1 In Greek Fanari. This fine 
plain was the chief support of Suli, 
and was in its line of communication 
with the sea-coast and Parga. 

2 Meaning the ridges of Trypa 
and Aghia Paraskevi. 


never ceased to regret their wild 
mountains ; and often took an op- 
portunity of indulging in a distant 
sight of Suli, the only consola- 
tion that was left to them. The 
allusion in the last line to the chace 
is explained by the custom among 
the mountaineers of Greece, of lying 


490 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


Vely takes leave of his father, and receives the public prayers 
of Sheikh Yustf. The Christians of Tzamuria on their side fast 
forty days, offer prayers, and make incantations for the success 
of the Suliotes. 


καὶ οἱ χριστιανοὶ τῆς Τζαμουργιᾶς ἐμαζωχθῆκαν ὅλοι 
καὶ τὸ θεὸ παρακαλοῦν νὰ μὴ παρθῆ τὸ Σούλι 
\ ΄, ΄ Uy \ oP 
καὶ λέγουν Παναγίαμου γλύτοστο τὸ καϊμένο. 
4 *% κε 
λανάρια καὶ σιδηροστιαῖς πέρνουν καὶ ἀνακατώνουν 


“τὰ / \ ~ » οὖ \ ‘ , 
ετζι μαντίβουν TOV πασιᾶ αυτοὶ καὶ τὸν καρφωγουν. 


‘* The Christians of Tzamuria were all collected together, 
And pray to God that Suli may not be taken ; 
And they say, Oh my Panaghia, save the unfortunate place. 
ἣ * * * 
Carding combs and trivets for cooking vessels they take and 
turn upside down, 
So they bewitch the Pasha and nail him ’.” 


The Greeks (ὕλη ἡ ἹΡωμιοσύνη) set apart a day for general 
prayer for the safety of Suli. Aly has many traitors in his 
camp, but they cannot move because he has their sons as hos- 
tages. The Suliotes, learning the approach of Vely towards 
their town, lie in ambuscade in a church, which they had forti- 
fied. While waiting the enemy they pray. 


βόηθα Χριστὲ καὶ Παναγιὰ τὸν δρόμο νὰ τοῦ κλείσῃς 
καὶ μονοπάτι πουθενὰ τοῦ Τούρκου μὴν ἀφήσῃς; 

βόηθα Χριστὲ καὶ Παναγιὰ τὸ μαυρισμένο Σούλι 
φλωρένια νὰ τὴν κάμουνε τὴν ἐκκλησιάσου ὅλη. 


*« Assist, Christ and Panaghia, to shut up his road, 
And leave not any where a path for the Turk ; 
Assist, Christ and Panaghia, the unfortunate Suli, 
So shall they make your church all golden.” 


Vely however arrives in such force, that they do not even fire 


in wait for the deer, roe-bucks, places. 

swine, and other wild animals of the 1 The Musulman poet has a lash 
mountains, at the springs andrivu- here at the Greek superstitions :— 
lets: especially in summer, when making use of their exact words. 
water is to be found only in a few 


13 


49] 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


a shot, and he proceeds to occupy Serekhati, and great Suli, 
leaving in his rear the Suliotes in the church. 

Driven out of their villages, the Suliotes, retire to the ridge 
in four bodies. 


\ 9 ιν / te »ὕ 6 - , 
καὶ εὐθὺς provAovuKia τέσσαρα ἔγιναν οἱ KavpEevoL 


δῶν ἐδλ ΄, \ \ Vee , 
Kat πῆραν Taypla Ta βουνὰ σαν ἢταν μαθημένοι. 


One of these was at Kiafa, one at Kugni (Χόνι), the third at 
Τρύπα. 
τάλλο μπουλούκι πάγησε στὰ Κούκια νὰ κλειστοῦνε 


σὰν τὸν ’"EykXélo στὸ γιαλὸ στὰ ζῶντα θὰ καγοῦνε. 


“ΤῈ 6 fourth division went and shut themselves in Kikia, 

To be burnt alive, like the Englishman at sea’.” 

Vely Pasha converts the church at Suli into a mosque. His 
father sends him a thousand masons to build a castle there. 

Messengers from the Suliotes go to Tzikurati to Hassan Aga 
Tzapari, to entreat his assistance in obtaining favourable terms 
from the Vezir. 

Hassan laments his want of influence,—that Aly retains his 
sons as hostages, has seized upon Fanari, and will perhaps col- 
lect the Kharat} even in Tzamuria ;—advises the Suliotes to 
submit, and offers in that case to intercede, but fears that it will 
be of little avail to them. 

Foto Tzavéla, with a deputation of Suliotes, appears before 
Vely Pasha, and asks permission to depart to whatever place he 
thinks fit. 

But the monk (ὁ Καλόγερος), i.e. Papa Samuel, refuses to 
join in this compromise, and persuades 500 men to join him in 
defending Kikia to the last. 

The Kalogheros (oe to the poet) had many sins to 
answer for. 


1 Alluding to the catastrophe of 
Papa Samuel. ‘“ Like the English- 
man at sea,’”’ is a proverbial Greek 
expression, derived from the fact of 
an Englishman who blew up his 
ship to avoid falling into the hands 
of a Barbaresque. The Albanians 


are the more likely to admire such 
an act, as they are very bad seamen, 
and seem totally out of their ele- 
ment when they are embarked, often 
showing a degree of fear, very sin- 
gular in men so brave and hardy in 
general, 


492 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 
εἶχε ἁμαρτίας 6 πικρὸς amo τὰ γονικάτου 

καὶ καίγουνταν βουρκόλακας στὰ γερονταματάτου 

# τ * 

κλείσου τοῦ λέγει ὄμορφα Kal κάμε TO σεφᾶσου 

va κρένουνε καλόγηρε στὸν κόσμο τονομάσου" 
ἐκεῖνοι ποῦ προσκύνησαν πολλοὶ θὰ μετανιώσουν 

καὶ σένα μπρὲ καλόγερε συχώρια νὰ σοῦ δώσουν" 
ἔτζι τοῦ λέγει ὁ δαίμονας ὁποῦχει στὴν κοιλιάτου 

va διώξῃ τὸν ᾿Αλῆ Πασιᾶ μὲ τὴν παλικαριάτου. 
““ He inherited sins, the bitter man, from his parents, 

And burnt a Vrukolakas’ in his old age. 

# * * 
Shut ycurself up in the castle, (says the Devil,) and take your 
pleasure, 7 

Monk, that they may talk of your name in the world; 

Those who have offered submission will greatly repent, 

And will approve of what you have done, friend monk ; 

Thus speaks the demon, which he has in his belly, 

(And which prompts him) to drive away Aly Pasha with his 

bravery.” 


Vely Pasha’s troops, who are tired of the war, are happy to 
hear of the proposal of the Suliotes. Aly comes to Suli, ap- 
proves highly of his son’s proceedings, and receives Foto Tzavéla 
(Φώτος TlaGédac), or Foti (Φώτης), as the poet sometimes calls 
him, who kisses the Vezir’s foot. 


~ ~ Tee 
"AAA Πασιᾶς ἐγύρισε καὶ éydidevoe τὸ Φώτη, 
~ 1 \ ~ ΄ , 
καὶ τίραξε τοῦ εἶπε καλὰ Ti γὼ σοῦ καίω TO σκότι, 


\ ~ F ΄ ΄ \ \ φ ~ \ ~ 
καὶ τοῦ εἶπε σύρε γλήγορα va τοὺς εἰπῆς va βγοῦνε 


τὶ τὸ δικόμου τὸ σπαθὶ θὲ νὰ τὸ θυμηθοῦνε. 


“«ΑἹΚ' Pasha turned round and caressed Foto, 
And look well to it, he said, for I will burn your liver? ; 


1 In the year 1700, Tournefort 
was an eye-witness of the burning 
of a Vrukélaka; the body of the 
deceased person, who was suspected 
of rising out of his grave to tor- 
ment the living, was cut in pieces 
by a priest and burnt.—Voyage au 


Levant, tome i. lettre 3. Though 
such instances of superstition are 
now very rare, the word Vrukélaka 
(derived from the Illyric) is in com- 
mon use to signify a ghost. 

2 This ydidevpa is quite in cha- 
racter, 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 493 


And, said he, return quickly and bid them come out, 
Or my sword they shall remember.” 


The Suliotes hesitating, Foto proposes to bring away his own 
followers ; tells the Vezir that the others must then follow, and 
accuses Kitzo Botzari of dissuading them from accepting the 
Vezir’s proposition. 

- The Vezir promises that those who quit the place that day 
shall not be molested, but that those who remain till the morrow 
shall be made slaves, and answerable for the expences in the 
war. 

Foto exerts himself to bring about the evacuation, because 
his wife is a hostage at Ioannina. He leads the way with his 
own tribe, and to all those who followed him the Pasha opened 
the road (τὸν dpdpovrove τὸν ἄνοιξε) : the others became slaves, 
men, women, and children. 


ἄνδρες γυναῖκες καὶ παιδιὰ ὅλοι ἐσκλαβωθῆκαν. 


But Aly still refuses to release Foto’s wife until Foto had 
consented to destroy the Kaloghero by secretly applying a match 
to the powder magazine at Kakia. 


9 \ " Ys \ ~ \ iY r 
ἀλλιὼς καϊμένε χριστιανὲ ἐγὼ σοῦ δὲν THY δίνω, 
A ~ ~ ~ 
τὴν ῥίχνω στὸ μουτπάκιμου, νὰ σοῦ τὸ εἰπῶ Kal κεῖνο, 
κρατῶ γὼ τὴ γυναΐκασου μαζὶ καὶ τὰ παιδιᾶσου, 
\ \ 4 7 \ \ / \ : U 
καὶ δὲν τὰ λέπουνε ποτὲ τὰ μάτια τὰ δικάσου. 


“ Otherwise, wretched Christian, I will not give her to you; 
I will throw her into my mutbak, that she may work like a 
slave. 
I will keep your wife together with your children, 
And your eyes shall never behold them.” 


Foto replies, 
καὶ τοῦ εἶπε ἀμὰν ἐφέντημου τούτη δουλιὰ τὴν κάνω, 
γιὰ τὸ χρυσόσου τόνομα νὰ πάγω νὰ ἀποθάνω. 
** Mercy, my lord, said he, this service I will perform ; 


I will go and die for your golden name.” 


Foto then approaches Kukia, and, in a secret conversation with 
the Papas, endeavours to persuade him that there is no possibility 
of resisting the Vezir, and no hope for him but in submission. 


494 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


The priest consents to depart, provided he has permission to sell 
the contents of his powder magazine, in order to fill which he had 
parted with all his property in the beginning of the blockade. 
Foto engages that the Pasha himself shall purchase it. In con- 
sequence of a dream, the Papas desires that the son of Papa 
Tanni of Sopiki may be sent to him as a security, as well as to 
weigh and take account of the powder. 

The son of Papa Ianni is sent by the Pasha accordingly, 
together with Foto, and while the priest with many others are 
assembled in the magazine round the young Sopikiote, Foto 
applies a match to a train of powder, and the magazine explod- 
ing, destroys all that were within it’. 

ὅσηταν στὸν καλόγερο καθόλου δὲν φανῆκαν 
ὅλος ὁ τόπος γύρισε, βουνὰ ξεριζωθῆκαν, 
καὶ τά χορτάρια τῆς γῆς καὶ κεῖνα μαραθῆκαν. 

‘‘ Those who were with the monk appeared no more: 

All the place was turned upside down; the mountains were 
unrooted, 
And the plants of the earth were withered.” 


The Vezir then takes possession of Kukia, when all its de- 
fenders who remain alive are, according to his former vow, made 
answerable for his expences, and sold for slaves. He then re- 
stores to Foto his wife, and makes him a present also of ten 
Suliote families, upon which Foto loses no time in proceeding to 
Parga, without taking leave of the Vezir, and then passes over 
with the Suliotes to the islands. : 

The Vezir sends for Papa Ianni, and a conversation ensues in 
which the Pasha, endeavouring to console him, says, 


τίταν γραφτὸ γιὰ va καῇ στὸ Σούλι τὸ παιδίσου. 
‘For it was written, that your son should burn at Suli.” 
And, among other things, adds, 


καὶ κεῖνος ποῦβαλε φωτιὰ θέλω τόνε σκοτώσω 
κιαναγαπᾶς στὰ χέριασου νὰ τὸν ἐπαραδώσω, 
\ \ / \ \ A / x ~ 
τὶ τὸ δικόσου τὸ παιδὲ νὰ ξέρῃς τὸν λυποῦμαι, 


μαραίνεται i) καρδούλαμου ὄντες ποῦ τὸν θυμοῦμαι. 


11 have before remarked that the Suliotes and their friends relate the 
story differently. 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 495 


** And he that put the fire I will slay him ; 
And, if you wish, into your hands I will deliver him ; 
For know that I grieve for your son, 
My heart withers when I think of him.” 


The Vezir then places a thousand men in Kiafa: 
χίλιους νομάτους ἔστειλε στὴν Κιάφα νὰ καθίσουν. 


as many in Kukia, and as many in Kugni’; takes possession 
of Fanari, and returns to lodnnina. 


A Dervish having remonstrated with the Vezir on the practice 
among the Christians of wearing fine cloth, dulamas of velvet and 
gold, and green dresses, so that at Ioannina he could not distin- 
guish a Turk from a Greek’. 


Τοῦρκος Ῥωμιὸς στὰ Γιάγενα δὲν μπορακάμω φάρκι. 


Aly issues a proclamation commanding the Rayds to wear 
dark-coloured dresses, forbidding velvet, and threatening to throw 
those who wear green cloth or yellow slippers into the lake. 

The Archons (οἱ Apyovrec στὰ Ivaveva), afraid of the sack (τὸ 
τζουβάλι), 2. 6. afraid of being drowned, shut themselves up in 
their houses and change their dresses, and lament that now, for 
the first time, they suffer this disgrace. 

Kitzo Bétzari still remained with the Vezir, who had built a 
house for him, and had given him a village for his support, 
but hearing that he «was accused of having encouraged the 
Suliotes not to submit, and of having assisted in supplying 
them with ammunition, he retires into a monastery in the dis- 
trict of Tzumérka, but at the same time desires his friends to 
intercede for him at Ioannina. 


1 Probably two or three hundred 
in each, for most of the poet’s num- 
bers will bear a similar deduction. 

2 The Dervishes seldom lose a 


avoid conforming occasionally to 
Musulman prejudices. The Greeks 
being fond of adorning their per- 
sons, are very sensible to such a 


good opportunity of rousing the re- 
ligious bigotry of the Turks against 
the Christians, and Aly, though 
careless himself of such matters as 
the dress of the Rayas, could not 


measure as is here described; but 
in the present ‘instance they took 
advantage of the order, and repre- 
sented it as a mourning for the loss 
of Suli. 


496 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


\ » \ arate \ / \ / 
va βγῆτε στὸν ἀφεντὴ μου νὰ πιᾶστε τὴν ποδιάτου. 


“ΤῸ go to the Lord, and take hold of his foot.” 


But on learning from his intercessors (ῥιτζάλια) that the Vezir 
asserted, that on the capture of Suli some of Kitzo’s letters had 
fallen into his hands, Kitzo sends for assistance :— 


στοὺς ἄλλους τοὺς Σουλιώταις 
ποῦ ἦταν κρυμμένοι στὰ χωριὰ σὰν μαραμέναις κόταις. 
‘** to the other Suliotes, 
Who were hidden in the villages like pining hens.” 


He requests of them lead and gunpowder, and adds, 


αἀκόμι τώρα χριστιανοὶ avicwe Kal γλυτώσω 
τὸ μοναστήρι βέβαια θέλω νάντα σιμώσω. 


“Απᾶ now if I yet escape, Christians, 
Truly I will purchase this monastery.” 


σὰν ἔστειλε τῶν χριστιανῶν τέτοιας λογῆς χαμπέρια 
τοῦ κουβαλοῦνε ζαχερὲ τὴν νύκτα μὲ τὰ στέρια 


- \ ~ 
εἰπὸ Ζαμπάντι τοῦ στειλαν νὰ ξέρῃς σὲ βουθοῦμε. 


‘* When he sent the Christians this intelligence 
They transport ammunition by night with the stars : 
They sent from Zabandi to say they would assist.” 


Several captains (Καπετάνιδες πολλοὶ) enter the monastery to 
assist Kitzo with the musquet (μὲ τὸ τουφέκι), as well as all the 
Suliotes, who were lying concealed (κρυμένοι ἀπὸ τὸν Βεζίρην). 
The rest assemble in the churches and pray for success. Twelve 
hundred men are collected in the convent. 

Here the poem concludes abruptly ; the poet having been ap- 
pointed by the Vezir to some employment in Rumili. He takes 
the opportunity of lauding the power of Aly, of whose wonderful 
acts he has only related a tenth; whose castles and tjiftliks are 
numberless as the sands, and astonish the world. 


Ta κάστρα καὶ ἣ παλάγγαις του στὴ γῆς τὴν οἰκυυμένῃν 
‘ , e/ e . ΄ ͵ ; 
τὰ βλέπουν ὅλος ὁ ντουνιὰς καὶ στέκουν θαμπωμένοι. 


The following are some of the concluding lines by which we 
learn the poet’s name, and that of his scribe : 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 497 


/ ‘ ἢ 4%> 
καὶ τώρα ἀποφάσισα νὰ σώσω τὴν φυλάδα 


* * * * * * 


va μάθετε τὸν τόπομου καὶ μὲν καὶ γονικάμον 
\ , > , ~ / , ΄ 
στὸ Ντέλβινο ἦν πατρίδαμου, σᾶς γράφω τόνομαμον 
Χατζε Σιρέτης κράζομαι, πτωχὸς ἐπ᾽ τὸ σεβντάμου, 
ἄν θέλετε νὰ μάθετε καὶ τὸν γραμματικόμου 
Παγαγιώτης Σαλονίτογλους καὶ σκλάβος ταφεντόμου, 
9 ‘ 3 ‘ >,7 / \ 4 
ἀμὰν, ἀμὰν ἐφέντημου κρίφι σκλαβὸς δικόσσου 


ΤΥ τς ᾿ , Ne 3! oe , 
απὸ τὸν θεὸν γυρευομεν και απ τὴν γυβερνησίνσου. 


n 
΄σ. 


And now I have resolved to finish the page.— 
That you may know my origin, myself, and my parentage, 
Délvino is my native country: I write you my name. 
I am called Hadji Serét, a poor man by destiny. 
If you wish to know who is my scribe, 
It is Panaghioti Salonitoglu, a slave also of my lord. 
Pity, pity, my lord, for subsistence your slave 
Seeks from God and your good care.” 
# # * * * - 


\ / e if 
va ζήσουν οἱ πασιάδες 
χάϊρ ντοβᾶ σᾶς κάνομε καὶ μεῖς οἱ φουκαράδες". 
** Long life to the Pashas, 
To whom we poor men offer our good prayer.” 


Note IJ.—Pace 27. 
Valiaré Khan. 


It was within the walls of the Valiaré Khan that about 600 of 


the male inhabitants of Gardhiki were slaughtered by the guards 
of Aly Pasha, in the year 1812. Like another famous example 
of Turkish cruelty and treachery, the massacre of the Mamliks 
at Cairo, it furnishes a curious instance of the cowardice and infa- 
tuation which often blinds and paralyzes the people of these 
countries in cases of extremity, although accustomed from their 
youth to trust chiefly to their arms for security, to practice as 
well as to guard against dissimulation and treachery, and _ to 


1 Fukara, the plural of the Arabic fakir (poor man). 
VOL. I. K k 


4098 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


suspect every kind of deceit from an enemy. Though the Gard- 
hikiotes knew that their leader Demir Dost, together with Mus- 
tafa Pasha, (late of Délvino,) and the other hostages of their own 
town, had been disarmed and thrown into prison at Ioannina, 
they yielded to the invitation of Aly, to meet him, unarmed, at a 
place where they could not but have suspected that they were 
destined to destruction. 

After the massacre the Khan remained closed for a long time, 
during which an inscription in sixty-four verses, after having 
been approved by the Vezir, was placed over the door. It 
begins with a dialogue between the Khan and the dead men, 
who explain to the former the cause of the massacre. They 
remark that— 


Ὀντζάκι Μουτζοχουσάτικον ποῖος θέλει va χαλάσῃ 


Αὐτος νὰ εἶναι βέβαιος τὸν βίον θέλει χάσῃ. 


“δ that wishes to destroy the Mutjohussatic chimney’ will 
be sure to lose his life,’— 


And then proceeds to state -- 


‘‘ When Aly was a little boy, (μικρὸ παιδάκι,) deprived of his 
father, with no brother, and only a mother, we ran with arms in 
our hands to cut him off. He escaped, skilful as he is, (ὡς ἐπι- 
τήδιος,) upon which we went to Gariani (Καργιανὴ) and burnt 
his houses. It is now fifty years since. It is for that deed that 
he slew us at the Khan; that he has sent our chief men to the 
island of the lake of Ioannina, and there put them to death; that 
he has dispersed our families among all the kaz4s under his autho- 
rity, has razed our unfortunate town to the ground, and ordered 
that it may remain a desert forever. For he is a very just man, 
(Διότι εἶναι δίκαιος πολὺ,) and in like manner slew the Khormo- 
vites, and ordered that not one should remain alive.” In conclu- 
sion, Aly himself speaks and says: ‘‘ When I consider this ter- 
rible slaughter, I am much grieved, and I desire that so great an 
evil shall never occur again : 


Πλεὸν παρόμοιον κακὸν ποτέμου δὲν τὸ θέλω. 


For which reason I give notice to all my neighbours that they 


1 The house of Aly. 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 499 


must not molest my house, (τὸ ὀντζάκι μου va μὴ κακοποιήσουν,) 
but be obedient, in order that they may be happy (va ὑποτάσ- 
σωνται διὰ νὰ εὐτυχήσουν).᾽" 

This sad event took place (ἔγινε τοῦτο τὸ κακὸν) the 15th 
[27th] of March, 1812, in the afternoon, τὸ δειλινὸν κονταὶ, 1. 6. 
near three o'clock. 

Neither here, nor in the poem on the life of Aly, is any allusion 
made to the real cause of the resentment of Aly, and which is the 
only excuse for his vengeance, namely, the horrible treatment 
which his mother and sister suffered from the people of Khormovo 
and Gardhiki. The poet does not even allude to the women 
having been made prisoners when Aly escaped. 


Norte IIJJ.—Pace 41. 


The following information concerning Arghyrokastro was de- 
rived from D., an intelligent Christian native, who was in my 
service. 

Arghyrokastro contains 4000 houses, two-thirds of which are 
Musulman; but the Turks and Greeks live upon nearly equal 
terms. When friends visit, even although of different religions, 
they do not hide their women, but show them great respect, 
rising to make way for them; and this custom is observed both 
in the houses and streets. But all advances towards familiarity 
are scrupulously avoided, and the women are subject to the same 
laws of jealousy and restraint as in other parts of Turkey. Both 
Greek and Turkish women are in the same servile condition. 
Each head of a family has weight and influence in proportion 
to the numbers of his relations and adherents, in which are 
generally included all the collateral branches. The persons of 
chief power, and who upon ordinary occasions are looked up to 
as composing the government of the place, are the brothers 
Morteza Bey and Khotad Bey. They assume the power of 
imprisoning, judging, and even of inflicting capital punishment. 

The Καστρίταις, (Kastrites,) as the people of Arghyrékastro 
are usually called in Greek, boast that in the city and dependent 
villages, there are 1200 tuféks, (musquets,) and all in the hands 
of the best παλικάρια in Albania. Many of them are in Aly 
Pasha’s service, and all are willing to be employed by him; but 
they express their determination of resisting his attempts to re- 

Kk 2 


500 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


duce them to entire subjection, as they know it would be fol- 
lowed as usual by his converting many of their lands into tjiftliks 
of his own. 

Family quarrels occur at Arghyrékastro as in other parts of 
Albania, often spread to the most distant branches, and are some- 
times handed down from father to son. Aly Pasha, who wished to 
remove one Mehmét Bey, and knew that he had wounded the 
brother of D., who was then one of Aly’s body-guard, sent one 
day for him, dismissed his attendants, made D. sit down beside 
him, proposed to him to go to Arghyrékastro, and place gun- 
powder under the house of Mehmét, and thus to blow him up 
with all his family. D. said he could not undertake so desperate 
a task, but that he would shoot the Bey, and upon this mission 
proceeded to his native town. Here, having bribed a man who 
had a window looking into Mehmét’s house, D. watched his 
opportunity, fired, missed his object, but cut in two a candle 
which stood near the Bey, and left him in darkness, by which D. 
had time to elude the Bey’s search, and to make his escape. D. 
related the transaction as a thing that did him some credit, though 
from fear of the Vezir he desired that it should be kept 
secret. The same person was a near witness of the death of 
Vely Bey of Klistira and his brother, whom Aly enticed to loan- 
nina on occasion of the marriage of Aly Pasha’s son Vely with 
the daughter of Ibrahim Pasha. One day D. was ordered to 
fire a pistol on the staircase leading to the private apartment, in 
which the Vezir was in the habit of receiving only members of 
his family, and persons summoned to attend him on particular 
business : Aly then pretending to consider himself unsafe, directed 
that no person should enter the apartment armed, by which means 
he had a pretext for disarming both the Bey and his attendants, 
who had always before been at no great distance from their mas- 
ter on these occasions. His next step was to endeavour to per- 
suade each of the brothers that the other was endeavouring to 
persuade the Vezir to put him to death; and having thus pro- 
voked them to a quarrel in his own presence, he suddenly pre- 
tended to be alarmed, called his servants to his defence, and 
dispatched them. 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 501 


Nore τὸ Cuapter IV. 


Since this Chapter has been printed, I have been enabled by 
the kindness of Mr. T. L. Donaldson, architect, to subjoin among 
the plates at the end of this volume a plan of the ruins of Nico- 
polis, reduced from his drawings. From an examination of those 
drawings, and a comparison of the workmanship of the walls of 
the fortress now called the Paledkastro with that of the theatres, 
baths, and the great entrance of the city from port Comarus, it 
seems evident that the greater part of the Paledkastro is coeval 
with the other works, or of the time of Augustus; and that 
the observation which I made (see p. 188) as to repairs of a 
subsequent time, particularly in that of Justinian, will apply very 
little to the western and northern fronts of the Paledkastro, but 
only to portions of the walls, such as the Arabian gate, where 
the cross is seen. 


Notes Τὸ CHAPTER V. 


Nore I.—On Suli. 


The work from which the following notes on Suli are ex- 
tracted is intituled, ‘“‘ A Brief History of Suli and Parga.”— 
Ἱστορία Σύντομος Σουλίου, καὶ Πάργας. The author is a native 
of Parga, who ultimately became a major in one of the corps in 
the service of the Ionian islanders or their protectors. The first 
part of the history of Suli, together with that of Parga, dated by 
the author in 1801, was published at Paris in 1803; the entire 
work at Venice in 1815. Jn 1823 an English version of an 
Italian translation was published at Edinburgh. As the accu- 
racy of the original has suffered a little in this double transfu- 
sion, I have thought that an abstract of the work which I made 
long ago might still be acceptable to the reader. 

Seventy years ago, (7. 6. about 1730,) Suli had not more than 
200 men bearing arms: by degrees Turkish oppression compelled 
many of the inhabitants of the neighbouring country to retire 
into the mountain, and thus increased the Suliote population. 

The families of Suli, before the last war with Aly Pasha, 
were— 


502 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


1. The Ζερβάται: these take their name from Zerva, a vil- 
lage of the district of Arta. There were three brothers of that 
village, of whom one turned Turk, (ἐτούρκευσεν,) and settled in 
a Musulman village named Καρμπουνάρι, (between Margariti 
and Paramythia); another settled at Lefka of Corfi, where there 
is now a family of Zervates ; the third migrated to Suli. 

2. The Μποτζαράται, who came originally from Δραγάνη, 
four hours from Paramythia. 

3. The Δρακάται, from Mapravy, a village of the district of 
Λάμαρι. 

4. The Μπουζμπαάται, from the Βλαχοχώρια of Mount 
Pindus. 

5. The Δαγκλιάται, from Φανάρι. 

6. The Ζαβελλάται. 

7. The Ilacarac: the origin of these two is not known. 

These were the most ancient families ; there were many others 
of inferior note. The farthest distance of time to which the 
author has been able to trace the Suliote history is 150 years. 
In former times Suli was a Spahilik, and the Spahi lived at 
Toannina. His dues were regularly paid by the Suliotes, and 
so was the Kharatj (κεφαλιάτικον) of thirty-five paras for each 
man, and ten for each boy; the latter being so considered as 
long as he lived in his father’s house, whether married or not. 
Butter and cheese, their only produce, paid a tenth to the Spahi, 
all their corn and pulse was imported from the plains. Until 
the time of Aly, the Suliotes prided themselves upon being obe- 
dient (οὐκ ἀπειθεῖς) to the Porte. After Aly had established 
himself at Ioannina, he made many attempts to get the Spahilik 
of Suli out of the hands of the then Spahi Bekir Bey, who con- 
stantly refused, and was at length imprisoned and put to death 
by Aly. 

The author apologizes for the robberies of the Suliotes, by the 
necessity to which they were driven when the increasing num- 
bers of the enemy had deprived them of all the villages in the 
plains which had formerly supported them. They had neither 
arts nor commerce, but attended only to arms from their youth 
(παιδιόθεν). The women learnt the use of the musquet, and in 
war were employed in carrying ammunition and provision into 
the field. The wives of the most renowned warriors had the pri- 
vileges of πρωτογέμισμα and πρωτοπότισμα at the pvovc—that 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 503 


is, to fill their jars, or water their cattle, at the fountain, be- 
fore all other women; and it was a custom among them on those 
occasions to utter reproaches against the wives of men who had 
never distinguished themselves. When the men quarrelled, the 
women were in the habit of interfering, to prevent them from 
coming to blows; and this generally succeeded, because the men 
were afraid that a woman might in the confusion be killed, which 
would not only be a national loss, but would lead to a retaliation 
between two families which it might be difficult to compromise. 
There was no written law: in each family the head decided all 
disputes. Those which occurred between individuals of different 
families were made up by arbitration; and even in the case of 
a loss of life, was commutable by a fine. In Suli, however, 
these barbarous manners (which are general in Albania) 
were corrected by a high sense of military honour, and of pa- 
triotism, especially when the republic was threatened by an 
external enemy. 

There were four villages in the great ravine of Suli, namely, 
Σοῦλι, Γκιάφα, Αβαρίκος, and Σαμονήβα. These were the foun- 
dation of the league. Suli contained 19 φάραις, or alliances, 
and 425 families, the most noted were those of Ζαβέλλα (or 
Τζαβέλα), Μπότζαρη, and Δαγκχιά. In Gkiadfa were 4 fares, 
and 60 families. In Avariko, 3 fares, and 55 families. In 
Samoniva, 3 fares, and 30 families. 

In the height of their power the Suliotes had 66 villages in their 
confederacy, the territory of which extended 4 hours, or two- 
thirds of the distance towards Margariti, and about half way to 
Paramythia and to loannina: the former of which is reckoned 
8, and the latter 14 hours from Suli. 

The villages in the district of Margariti were :— 


Τζικουράταις, Κοῦνι, Τουρκοπάλουκον, 
Ζαβροῦχον, Μπερμπῆλι, Γκανῆ, 

Ποταμιὰ, Ζαροβίνα, Tporate, 

Τλυκὺ, Βερμπέτζα, Κελλὶ, 
Περιχάταις, Γιαγννοὐύτζη, Σπαθᾶρι, 
Κατζανοχῶρι, Κορυτιανὴ, Σαλέσσι, 
Νεμίτζα, Μποντάρι, Παλιοκιτζιάταις, 
Χόϊκα, ἡ Νιαγκάταις, Σκάνδαλον, 
Κλεισοῦρα, Γορίτζα, Κουλοῦρι, 
Μουζακάταις, Κορώνη, Στάνοβο, 
ἽΑρτζαις, Κορωνόπουλον, Λουγκαγίους. 


504 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


In the districts of Paramythia and Io4nnina :— 


Ζιγκάρι, or Τζιγκάρι, Σέσσι, Γκινόλα, 

or Τζαγκαάρι, ᾿Αλσοχῶρι, Σκιαδὰ, 
Κολιοὺς, Παλαιοχῶρι, Ζεφλῆκι, 
Πλυβίτζα, Κοντάταις, Ζεσιανὰ; 
Καρίστιανη, Σερίτζιανα, or ava, Τερβίτζιανα, or ava, 
Mzeoria, Γοράνα, Γιοργάνη, 
Μοκοβίνα, Νικολιτζίους Μπαάλα, 
Δραγοβέτζη, Μπουλιαράταις, Κλεπαδι, 
Αρδόσι, Κουτζιανόπουλον, Τόσκησι, 
Συστροῦνι, Ζερλία, ΛΔύβα, 
Ῥωμανάταις, Ζερμὴ, Τκολυμὴ. 
Βύλα, 


In time of war all the outlying villages were left to their fate, 
and the inhabitants of the following only were allowed to retire 
into the mountain. Tzikurates, which has 5 fares; Perikhates, 
2; Vyla, 2; Alsokhori, 3; Kondates, 1; Gkindla, 3; Tzefliki, 
2; in all 18 exterior fares, helping to defend the mountain. 
The outer villages assisted the mountain secretly with provision, 
and were seldom much injured by the enemy, for fear of a 
retaliation upon his own villages. It was the practice of the 
Suliotes, when they met with large bodies of the enemy, to 
skirmish only, but when they encountered with numbers nearly 
equal, to kill or make prisoners, and afterwards to take ransom 
for as many as possible. They had as much prudence as valour, 
and seldom exposed themselves but when they could not effect 
their purpose by stratagem and cunning. 

The Suliotes not having committed their transactions to writ- 
ing, have lost the exact history of them. Their wars were 
chiefly with the Turks of Margariti, Paramythia, and loannina. 
The following are the principal :— 

1. Against Hadji Pasha, son of Aslan Pasha, who commanded 
12,000 men, when the Suliotes had only 180. 

2. Against Mustafa Pasha, and 7000 men. 

3. Against Dost Bey, and 8000. 

4, Against Maxtt Aga, and 6000. 

5. Against Suliman Tzapari, and 9000. 

The Suliotes drove him and his son Hassan into the church of 
St. George, in Suli, and threw hives of bees in through the roof, 
till they surrendered. The Suliotes received 1000 sequins for 
the ransom of these prisoners. 


ὧι 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 50 


6. Against Pasia Kokka, and 4000 men. 

7. Against Bekir Pasha, and 5000. 

8. Against Hassin Tzapari and Hassan Braim Aga, and 5000. 

9. Against Aly Pasha, and 10,000. 

10. Against the same, at the head of 22,000 men, in the 
summer of 1792’. 

On the last occasion, when the Pasha had collected his troops, 
he announced that the expedition was destined against Arghyro- 
kastro, and wrote to the two heads of the houses, Botzari and 
Tzavélla, inviting them to accompany him, and offering double 
pay to all those whom they should bring with them. Botzari 
declined to go, but Tzavélla with 70 men accepted the proposal. 
He had some suspicion that the expedition was really intended 
against Suli, but his doubts were removed on learning that a 
portion of the Vezir’s army had advanced to Arghyroékastro, and 
had even been engaged in action near the town. When the Vezir 
himself, following in the same direction with the Suliotes, had 
arrived at the banks of the Kalama, 30 miles from Ioannina, he 
seized an opportunity, when the Suliotes had laid aside their 
arms after the march, to make them all prisoners, except three. 
Two of these fought till they were slain; the third leapt over a 
precipice into the river (ἔνα χαὸς ποταμοῦ), where no one dared 
to follow, and had the good fortune to escape a great number of 
shot that were fired at him. The Pasha marched immediately 
to Suli, hoping to surprise it, but the fugitive had given the 
alarm. While the Pasha was encamped before Suli, he was 
saved from a plan, which the Suliotes had laid to surprise and 
carry him off, by a certain tinker (γανωτὴς ἀγγείων) from the 
KAatzano-khoria, who sent him a messenger with a letter in his 
shoe. This tinker is now (1801) called Λογοθέτης, and is in 
great favour with Aly. The Pasha having made Tzavélla great 
offers if he would assist him in obtaining possession of the moun- 
tain, Tzavélla engaged to do so, and left his son Foto in the 
Pasha’s hands as a hostage. Tzavélla then wrote the letter of 


1 In this expedition the Agas of tainty of Oriental accounts. As in 
Margariti and Paramythia were Herodotus, the numbers of the de- 
united with Aly. The estimate of fenders were well known, and those 
the enemy’s forces on all these oc- οὔ the invaders exaggerated. 
casions is liable to the usual uncer- 


506 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 
defiance which has been published by Eton, from whose work 
the author copied it’. 

Aly having formed a body of 8000 chosen Albanians, made 
them a speech, after which they broke their scabbards, and ad- 
vanced against Suli from Glyky, by the pass of Klistira. Kitzo, 
the nephew of Tzavélla, who was shut up in a tower near the 
entrance of the pass, defended himself so obstinately, that all his 
men, amounting to sixteen, were slain. The Suliotes, who were 
only 1300 in arms, were driven back to the pass of Aghia 
Paraskevi, where a terrible contest took place, which lasted for 
10 hours. The superiority of numbers prevailed for a time, and 
the Albanians got possession of the town of Suli, but had not 
been there many minutes when a general assault was made upon 
them by the women as well as men of Suli, and they were put 
to flight. Aly, who had beheld the battle with his telescope 
from the hill of Bogoritza (Mzoyopirfa), perceiving that there 
was no hope, and fearing for his own safety, retreated with all 
possible speed to Ioannina, where he ordered all persons to keep 
within their houses, in order that the extent of his loss might not 
be witnessed by the loannites when his troops marched into the 
town. One thousand armed men only returned; the rest threw 
away their arms and part of their dress, that they might escape 
the more easily over the rocks, and thus after hiding themselves 
in the woods, they arrived half naked at Ioannina. The Suliotes 
had 74 slain, and 90 wounded. The enemy, besides 2500 killed 
on the spot, lost many more who were cut off by the people of 
the outlying villages of the Suliote confederacy. The two 
parties fought from the Ist to the 20th July (old style), on 
which last day the Pasha fled’. 


1 He errs, however, in supposing 
that Eton himself was at Ioannina, 
when the transaction took place. 
Eton never was in this part of 
Greece, but derived his information 
from a Greek interpreter, who was 
in the service of the French Consul 
at Saloniki, and happened to be at 
Ioannina at the time. 

2 The author, though he refers to 
Eton’s work for some of the trans- 


actions which occurred previously 
to the battle, does not follow him 
any farther, but substitutes this short 
statement. He was probably sen- 
sible of the incorrectness of the nar- 
rative of Eton, who relates that the 
Albanians not only took Suli, but 
Kiafa also; that 400 Suliotes were 
posted in the three towers of Mount 
Bira, and 400 in the forest on either 
side of the KlisGra, and that when 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 507 

Moskho (Mécyoc), the wife of Tzavélla and mother of Foto, 
particularly distinguished herself on the day of battle. She 
broke open some cartridge boxes with a hatchet; and then load- 
ing herself and the women with cartridges, distributed them to 
the Suliotes in the trenches (perepiZia). When Aly threatened 
to roast alive her son Foto, who was in his hands, she replied, 
that she was young, and could have other children, and that she 
would eat a bit of the roasted flesh rather than betray her 
country *. 

In 1798, when the war was on the point of breaking out 
between France and Turkey, Aly returning on that account from 
Widdin, where he had been employed against Pasvant-Oglu, 
began hostilities by seizing the French General, Rosa, whom he 
had invited to a conference, and sent him prisoner to Constan- 
tinople. He then marched against Prévyza, which was occupied 
by a French garrison. The Prevyzans obtained a refuge for 
their families in Lefkadha, Paxis, Thiaki, and Parga, and pre- 
pared to assist the French garrison in defending the isthmus of 
Nicopolis. Instead of a trench which would have been effectual 
against the Turkish cavalry, the French fortified the isthmus 
with five redoubts. Their officers were at variance among one 
another, and stormy weather prevented the arrival of reinforce- 
ments from Lefkadha, so that the Vezir gained an easy victory 
at Nicopolis, and immediately marched into Prévyza, which had 
no works to defend it. 

The battle was fought on the 12th of October, 1798. The 
Turks, who were 4000 strong, were opposed by 300 French and 
600 Prevyzans; the attack was made on the height near the great 


4000 Turks had advanced nearly to 
the Trypa, Bétzari, who was stationed 


Eton for having said that Tzavélla 
was among the slain on this occasion, 


in one of the towers, rang a bell 
as a signal to those who were in 
ambuseade in the forest, and who 
were commanded by his son Deme- 
trius, and accompanied by Tzavélla. 
These advancing rapidly upon the 
rear of the enemy, and cutting off 
his retreat, produced the rout and 
dispersion which the historian of 
Suli has stated. The author blames 


instead of which he died of disease 
three years afterwards. 

1 Eton’s informant was present 
when Foto was brought before Vely 
Pasha, who told him that he was to 
be roasted, in consequence of his 
father’s treachery, when the boy re- 
plied, “‘ My father will roast your 
father, or brother, if he catches 
them.” 


508 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


theatre, after which the French retreated into the redoubts*. At 
Prévyza, men, women, and children, were slaughtered, and the 
remainder sold like cattle [ὠς ra ἄλογα ζῶα]. A few days after 
his arrival at Prévyza, the Vezir wrote to the people of Parga, order- 
ing them to submit, and to put the French garrison to the sword ; 
hoping by these means to cut off the resources of the Suliotes, 
which were almost entirely derived from Prévyza and Parga: 
but the Parghini disregarded his summons, and made common 
cause with Suli; and seven days afterwards, the Russo-Ottoman 
squadron having arrived, took Parga under its protection. 

Though Aly thus failed in deriving all the advantage which he 
had expected from the possession of Prévyza, he determined to 
lose no time in attacking Suli once more. This was the eleventh 
war of which the Suliotes preserve a tradition. Having called 
the Beys and Agas together, Aly put them in mind of an ancient 
Albanian prophecy, that the Turks were to be conquered by the 
Franks ; that the Albanians were to fight forty years longer with 
the Franks, and then to make peace with them; that the attack 
upon Turkey was about to take place, and consequently that 
they, the Albanians, must be prepared for war with the Franks. 
The resolutions of the council were kept secret; and it was given 
out that an armament was intended against Corfi: 28,000 men 
were in the meantime collected, and when assembled, suddenly 
- surrounded Suli, which, in consequence of the treachery of George 
Bétzari, was not sufficiently provided. 

This Suliote captain lived at Lakia, four hours from Suli, (on 
the upper Acheron). Aly Pasha and the neighbouring Agas had 
been glad to keep on peaceable terms with him, because by his 
means their lands were exempted from the inroads of the Suli- 
otes. The stipulated number of lufés (Aovgédec), which it was 
customary for the Turks in time of peace to pay to the Suliotes 
in order to ensure safety to the places bordering on them, were 
received by Botzari, as commanding the advanced posts of the 
Suliotes, and ought to have been accounted for to the commu- 
nity, instead of which he divided them solely among the men of 
his own fara, and thus he first became suspected. His next step 
was to receive a bribe of 2500 piastres from Aly, to abstain from 


> It is generally stated by the Prevyzans, that a few of the French only 
behaved well on this occasion. 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 509 


interrupting him in his attack upon Prévyza, which his command 
of the passes leading to Lamari and the isthmus of Nicopolis 
enabled him to do. At length he went over to the Vezir with 
seventy families. When Aly found that, notwithstanding this 
loss, Suli was as determined as ever in its resistance, he obliged 
George Bétzari himself to march against Suli with 200 men, who 
were beaten at Redhovini (Ῥαιδοβοῦνι). The traitor died in 
less than half a year after his defection ; some say of grief, others 
that he was poisoned by the Vezir. The Suliotes attribute his de- 
fection, which is the greatest blot in their history, to Palaska, a 
man of Suli, who had been for some years in the service of the 
Pasha, and who, pretending to desert the Vezir, joined George 
Botzari before his defection, and married his daughter. 

The Suliotes were now 1500, under Φῶτος Τζαβέλλας, Δῆμος 
Apaxov, Totoac Ζέρβας, Tlijpa Ζέρβας, Κουτζονίκας, Τκόγκας, 
Δαγκλὴς, Διαμάντης Μάρκου, Γιαννάκης Σέκου, Πάσχος Λάλας, 
Βέϊκος Ζάρμπας, Θανάσης Πώνου, Κατζιμπέλης, ΤΓιώργιος Μποῦ- 
σπος, Ζηγούρης Διαμάντη, Κολετζὴς Μαλάμου, Πανταζὴς Ντότας, 
ἈΑναστάσης Kacxayn, Δναστάσης Βάγιας, Γιώργιος Καραμπίνης, 
Νικόλαοος Δημητρίου, Ἰωάννης Γιωργίου, ΤΓιαννάκης Λάκη, Τιώρ- 
γιος Καλησπέρας, Κίτζος Πανταζῆ, Παναγιώτης Λάμπρου, Τὶιαν- 
νάκης Πεπόνη, Θανάσης Τζάκαλη, Μῆτος Ταπαγιάννη, Κώστας 
Κουρίτζης. 

The Vezir’s attack upon Suli was thus ordered :—First, 5000 
men under Bekir Tjokadér TZtoyadovpov, Giocatore); of these, 
Hadji Bétu (Mzérov) moved from Luro (Aovpoc) and Kutziano- 
pulo (Κουτζιανόπουλον), and thence to Zermi (Ζέρμὴ), where they 
fought with 70 Suliotes under Nikola Dhimitriu, Nati Tjardji 
(Narne ἸΤζιάρτζη), and Kolezi Fotomara (Κολετζὴς Pwropapdc). 
The Turks drove them beyond Seritziana (ZepirZcava), and then 
halted : the Suliotes remained at Kaloghera (Kadoyepd), a mile 
and a half distant. Secondly, 8000 moved from Luro, Riniassa 
(Ῥινιάσσα), and the bridge of Tzoknidha (Tfoxvida), near 
Porto Fanari, to Guritza (Γουρίτζα) in Fanari, where they 
remained two nights, and on the third day arrived at Nemitza 
(Νεμέτζα), where 400 Suliotes fought with them in the evening. 
In the night 200 of these, under Foto Tzavélla, retired to Suli, in 
consequence of a false report, that the Pasha’s Seliktar with 3000 
men was in possession of Mount Bogoritza; the remaining 200 
Suliotes resisted all the ensuing day about Tzikurates, Perikhates, 


510 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


and Glyky, and slew 128 Turks: of the Suliotes one fell, and five 
or six were wounded. Soon afterwards 300 under the Seliktar 
passed the Bogoritza to Vyla, which is four hours from Suli; they 
were opposed by not more than 70 Suliotes, but did not dare attack 
them. Three days afterwards another Musulman chief, Metzo- 
bono (Μετζομπόνος), with 2000 men, passed Λύπα and arrived at 
Lyvikista (Δυβίκιστα) ; the Suliotes attacked them, when tired 
with the march, and had they not taken shelter in the church and 
houses, half of them would have been destroyed; 30 were slain, 
and their arms, clothes, and provisions, with 25 horses, were 
taken: two Suliotes were killed. Thirdly, Isliam Pronio of 
Paramythia, and Mahmud Daliani of Konispoli, with 1500 men, 
marched to the mountain of Virtzékha (Βιρτζάχα), but as they 
wished well to the Suliotes, they only pitched their tents there. 
On the same day on which Metzobéno was defeated, the Vezir 
himself arrived with all the remainder of his troops at Lypa. He 
ordered all the men under the command of Yusaf Arapi, Hassan 
Tzapari, Ambaz Tepelenli, Ibrahim Khemi, Suliman Tjoban, 
and Mustafa Zygiri, to join Isliam Bey at Virtzakha, but on that 
day they only reached Sistriini (Σιστροῦνι). 200 Suliotes under 
Foto and other chieftains possessed themselves in the night of 
a part of Sistrani. In the morning they showed themselves, and 
were attacked by Mustafa Zygitri, at the head of 1300 men, who 
were soon followed by the whole army there posted, to the amount 
of 11,000. Foto shot Zygiri, then drawing his sword, and fol- 
lowed by all the Suliotes, he advanced against the Turks, and at 
the first fire brought down 25 of the enemy. The Turks re- 
treated for two hours, and Foto brought away Zyguri’s head. 
The Vezir then ordered all his forces to join Pronio, which was 
done the next day. On the third night the Suliotes, instructed 
of the enemy’s motions by their friend Proénio, sent forward 250 
men, headed by Foto and Dhimo Dhraku, to Virtzakha, and at- 
tacking the Turks three hours before day, and again at daylight, 
forced them to retreat with the loss of 22 men. One Suliote was 
killed, and Katzimbéli was wounded. The flight of the enemy 
was partly caused by a terrible hail which fell only upon the 
Turks, and was considered by both sides as an ὀργὴ Θεοῦ. They 
retreated to Lypa so much depressed in spirits, and so many of 
them desirous of returning home, that Aly found it necessary to 
address them with great mildness (γλυκύτητα καὶ παράπονον), 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 511 


informing them that he intended to change his mode of attacking 
Suli, to build kules all around, and thus to blockade the Suliotes 
and prevent them from obtaining any provision or ammunition. 
He collected accordingly 300 builders (κτίστας), and began the 
operation, but having failed in driving the Suliotes from their 
outposts, many of his masons were killed, and he was unsuccess- 
ful in cutting off the enemy’s communications. The following 
were the villages which the Turks occupied for the blockade, and 
in which they built towers :—Iv«d, Περιχάτη, Τζικουράτη, To- 
pava, Σεριτζιάνα, Ζερμὴ, Κουπάτι, Boda, ‘Pwpavarn, Σιστροῦνι, 
and Λυβίκιστα. The whole circumference of the πολιορκία, or 
blockade, was twelve hours. The towers were built on all the 
strongest points. 

Ibrahim Pasha of Avléna now moved to the assistance of Aly 
with 2000 men, and took up his station on Mount Κουρίλα, four 
hours from Suli, to the northward. Foto marched against him 
with 1000 παλικάρια. They fought for three hours, when Foto 
was wounded from behind a rock. He called to his companions 
to cut off his head, but after some fighting he was brought off. 
The Suliotes, when he first returned to the field, having shown 
their joy in the usual manner (kara ro συνηθὲς), by firing their 
musquets; the Vezir’s Albanians flattered themselves that it 
was caused by some quarrel, and attacked them with 2000 
men, of whom 70 were slain, and 80 taken. Actions now oc- 
eurred almost daily. The Turks tired of the war, and of living 
only upon black bread and garlic, began to desert. An infectious 
disorder carried off five or six ina day. The Pasha filled up his 
ranks with new troops, but soon afterwards again left off fighting, 
and attempted a more rigid blockade. ‘The Suliotes, however, 
found the means of carrying off horses and cattle from the country 
which was occupied by the enemy, and of receiving supplies from 
Parga. The Pasha next offered peace, to which the Suliotes 
were sufficiently inclined. He required twenty-four hostages, 
but as soon as he had received them broke off the treaty, and 
sent the hostages to the island in the lake of Ioannina. Here, in 
order to disarm them, he obliged the priest of a church in the 
island to represent to them that it was acrime to enter the church 
with arms when they attended prayers, and the Suliotes having 
in consequence left their arms on the outside, some persons con- 
cealed for the purpose seized them. One ofthe Suliotes who had 

13 


512 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


kept a pistol in his girdle, shot himself with it as soon as he had 
discovered the treachery, which they all expected to be followed 
by their destruction. 

Pronio, conscious that he was an object of suspicion to the 
Vezir, and apprehensive of the consequences, withdrew his forces, 
under pretence of preventing the Suliotes from obtaining supplies 
from his territory, but not before the Vezir, by means of an under- 
standing with some of the Agas of Paramythia opposed to Prénio, 
had introduced 500 of his Albanians into the castle at that place, 
which obliged Pronio to comply with the Vezir’s demand of his son, 
as a hostage for his fidelity to the Vezir’s cause. The Suliotes 
having now no hope but from Ibrahim Pasha of Berat, sent Pasko 
Lala to him; when Ibrahim, who, though he had marched from 
Berat to the Vezir’s aid, was in truth not more sincerely attached 
than Prénio to Aly’s cause, consented to supply the Suliotes with 
200 horse-loads of kalambokki, and 30,000 cartridges. Aly had 
immediate advice of this transaction, and as it left him little hope of 
speedy success, he sent his Seliktar with Kitzo Bétzari to make 
peace, before the Suliotes could learn the result of Pasko Lala’s 
mission. The Suliotes being much straitened (στενοχωρημένοι), 
accepted the overtures, for the mere purpose of supplying them- 
selves and families with food, and sent back Kutzonika with the 
Pasha’s messengers to Ioannina. Ibrahim, on hearing of these 
negociations, withdrew his supplies, when Aly immediately broke 
off the truce, but not before the Suliotes had laid in a consider- 
able store of provisions. 

They continued to resist courageously. Aly offered them 2000 
purses and a fertile country to live in, if they would retire from 
Suli. They answered, that their country was infinitely sweeter to 
them than either his money or his delightful places (ἡ tarpiopac 
εἶναι ἀπείρως γλυκητέρα καὶ ἀπὸ rd ἄσπρασου καὶ ἀπὸ τοὺς εὐτυχεῖς 
τόπους σου). He then sent an agent (μεσίτης) to offer Tzima 
Zérva 800 purses, if he would withdraw with his adherents. Zerva 
refused the bribe, and replied that he should not know how to 
count such a sum (ra ὀκτακόσια πουγγεία παρακαλῶ μὴ μοῦ τὰ 
στείλῃς, ἐπειδὴ καὶ δὲν ἰξεύρω νὰ τὰ μετρήσω). The Vezir'’s 
troops continued to desert, until being reduced at length to 
8000, they found sufficient employment in protecting their own 
towers and trenches, and were more blockaded than the be- 
sieged. 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 513 


As Suli received supplies chiefly from Parga, Aly caused 
Hierotheus, (Ἱερόθεος,) metropolitan bishop of Ioannina, to write 
to Chrysanthus, (Χρύσανθος,) his suffragan of Paramythia, who re- 
sided at Parga, desiring him to use his spiritual influence against 
this alliance, or at least to give the metropolitan secret advice of 
all the designs of the Parghini (τῶν Παργινῶν). The letter of 
course was dictated by Aly, who himself also wrote to Chrysan- 
thus as follows: 


Seal. 


My friend Duatzi*, despot of Paramythia, with my salutation, 
I inform you that Hassan Aga Tzapari has come here, and has 
interceded for you: I therefore, for his satisfaction, and because 
I take you under my protection, have overlooked all your fail- 
ings towards me. Wherefore, on receiving my present letter, 
set out without any suspicion, and come here; for you are my 
protégé, and I love you beyond any other. Only come without 
fail, and do not let any thing rest upon your mind. No more. 
Farewell. 


loaénnina, March 8, 1801. 


The bishop went to Ioannina very unwillingly, and chiefly in 


Βουλλα. | 





1 Ἡμέτερε Δουατζή pov, Δεσπότη τῆς Παραμυϑίας, μετὰ τὸν χαιρετισ- 
μόν μου σὲ φανερώνω Ort ἐδὼ ἦλθεν ὁ Χασᾶν Αγᾶς Τζαπάρης καὶ μὲ ἔκαμε 
ῥιτζά διὰ ἐσένα καὶ ἐγὼ διὰ τὸ χατῆριτου, μαντάμ καὶ ἔχεις βρεϑῆ τζιράκι 
δικόνμου, ὅλα τὰ σούτζιασου τὰ ἔχάρισα" ὅϑεν λαμβάνοντας τὸ παρόνμου 
δίχως κανένα σουμπεχὲ νὰ κινήσῃς καὶ νάλϑῃς ἐδὼ, ὅτι ἐσὺ εἶσαι τζιράκι- 
μου καὶ σὲ ἀγαπῶ καλήτερα ἀπὸ Kade ἄλλον" μόνον μουτλάκ νὰ ἔλϑης καὶ 
μὴν βάλῃς τίποτες στὸν νούνσου, καὶ ὄχι ἀλλο: ὑγίαινε. 

1801, Μαρτίου 8, ᾿Τωάννινα. 


This is a good specimen of the οὗ the ordinary words, besides the 
Vezir’s style, and of the Musulman proper names, are Turkish instead 
natives of Greece in general. Seven οἴ Greek. 


VOL. I. ι,] 


514 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


consequence of the influence of a mother, two brothers, and two 
married sisters, who, being detained there by the Vezir, were 
compelled to join in persuading the bishop, who was not allowed 
to return to Parga until he had paid the Vezir sixteen purses 
(about 600/.) Soon afterwards, an agent of Ibrahim Pasha went 
to Parga; but Aly, though he wrote a pressing request to 
the bishop to learn the purport of this mission, received no 
answer to his letter. The mother and one brother of Chrysan- 
thus died in the prison of Ioannina, the rest ultimately recovered 
their liberty by the payment of a heavy ransom. 

In the nine months during which Aly carried on active opera- 
tions against Suli, his army lost 3800 men, besides wounded : 
the Suliotes had only twenty-five men killed, but they lost many 
by the effects of the hardships which they underwent. For ten 
months their sufferings from famine were extreme; although as 
a precaution they had sent many of the women and old men, 
together with 200 men belonging to the allied villages, (τὰ πέριξ 
xwpid,) to the Septinsular Republic (Ἑ πτάνησος Πολιτεία). At 
the end of a year they were obliged to feed on grass, bark, and 
acorns, mixed with a little flour, and without any better support 
often fought in the midst of rain or snow. About this time 413 
men and 174 women made an expedition to Parga in search of 
provision, and on the fifth day returned laden, both women and 
men. All the men were armed, and 100 of them, who were less 
heavily laden than the others, were placed as a defence in front 
and rear. The Turks did not attack them. 

The three heroes of the Suliotes at this time were Foto Tza- 
vélla, (Φῶτος Τζαβέλλας,) Dhimo Dhraku, (Δῆμος Apdxov,) and 
the Priest Samuel, (Ἱερομόναχος Σαμουῆλ). Among the strata- 
gems by which they obtained provisions, that of John of Strivini, 
(Iuadvyne Στριβινιώτης,) is particularly mentioned. Clothed in a 
white cloak, he passed unnoticed in the midst of a herd of cattle 
of the same colour, which were driven in the dusk of the evening 
into a stable, (κατώγιον,) from whence, in the middle of the 
night, he sueceeded in conducting many of the cattle to Suli. 

When the war had lasted eighteen months, the affairs of the 
Suliotes again assumed an aspect of hope, by an union of the old 
enemies of Aly against him. These were: 1. Ibrahim Pasha, 
of Berat and Avléna, who, although father-in-law of Aly’s two 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 518 


sons, could never forget that Aly had once endeavoured to poison 
him by the means of his wife. 2. Mustafa Pasha of Délvino, 
whom Aly had formerly driven out of his town, and whose houses 
he had burnt. 3. Isliém Proénio of Paramythia. 4. Mahmid 
Daliéni of Konispoli, whose daughter had been married to 
Mukhtar Pasha, divorced by him, and then married to Selim 
Bey Kokka. These allies gave forty purses to the Suliotes to 
buy provisions and ammunition. Hostages were exchanged, 
and thus the war was rekindled from Avléna to Suli. Aly, 
enraged at this league (συμμαχία), hanged (ἐκρέμασε) a cousin of 
Foto Tzavélla, twelve years of age, and a nephew of Dhimo 
Dhraku, who were among the Suliote hostages (ἐνέχυρα) at 
Toannina. 

The alliance, although formidable in appearance, had no im- 
portant result: by dint of money Aly turned some of the beys of 
Ibrahim’s pashalik against him, and some of the beys of Paramy- 
thia against Pronio. But the chief cause of the dissolution of 
the league was the loss of the castle of Délvino. With a view to 
obtain this important post, Aly gained over to his interest the 
family of Kalapodha, (οἱ Kadaroddrec,) and through them a 
Gardhikiote bolu-bashi, who commanded in the castle. He then 
caused a fictitious letter to be written to Mustafa Pasha from his 
wife, who resided with her family at Vrankalates, eight hours 
from Délvino; which letter having caused the Pasha to quit 
Délvino for Vrankalates, a thousand men in the interest of Aly, 
who were at hand, entered Délvino, and were admitted by the 
Gardhikiote into the castle. Ibrahim Pasha, alarmed at an 
event which threatened to bring the war into his own country, as 
well as by the conduct of the Beys of Berat, made a separate 
peace, and thus the alliance was once more dissolved. The 
Suliotes, however, had made good use of the moment to lay in 
supplies, had attacked the Turks in their towers and villages, had 
slain many, and had taken others, whom they generally released 
after stripping them of their clothes and arms. Prénio remained 
faithful to the alliance, notwithstanding that his son was still in 
the Vezir’s hands; and Foto, with 300 men, having marched to 
Paramythia to his support, defeated his enemies, and returned to 
Suli on the second day with a considerable booty. 

In the castle of Délvino the Vezir found six Suliote hostages 


EE 


516 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


who had been sent thither when the alliance was made between 
Suli and Délvino. Among them was a brother of Foto and a 
son of Dhimo; these the Vezir spared, but beheaded the other 
four. Nevertheless, the chiefs of Suli performed the church ser- 
, vice for all six, after which they made an immediate attack upon 
the enemy, and obliged him to retire from one of his positions 
with a loss of seventy men. This was followed by an expedition 
against the villages of their neighbour Hassan Aga of Margariti, 
who had lately been active in the Vezir’s interest. The object 
of this excursion was to collect provisions, as they were now in 
the expectation of being speedily attacked. The monk Samuel 
was made superintendant of all the ammunition and provision. 
No immediate attack, however, followed; the Vezir having at 
this moment been ordered by the Porte into Rumili to oppose 
Osman Djurjim Pasha, who had appeared near Adrianople as a 
rebel and as an ally (ὁμόφρονα) of Pasvant-oglu of Widdin. 
During Aly’s absence, which lasted a great part of the summer 
and autumn of 1802, the Suliotes prepared for his return by col- 
lecting supplies. Samuel built a fortress (τειχόκαστρον) as a re- 
ceptacle for the stores, (ἀναγκαῖα,) and to serve as a place of de- 
fence (καταφύγιον ). Aly, on his return, sent Kitzo Bétzari 
with proposals of peace on the following conditions:—1. That 
Kitzo, with forty men, should be governor of Suli, under condi- 
tion of being answerable that the Suliotes should do no damage 
to the Vezir’s lands and villages (τόπους καὶ χωριά). 2. That 
Foto Tzavélla should be exiled from Suli. The Suliotes, consi- 
dering that their own number was diminishing rapidly, while 
Aly’s army was very numerous, that the Musulman Tzamidhes 
began to fight against them more in earnest than they had 
hitherto done, and that no hope of further assistance appeared, 
so far complied with the Vezir’s proposals that Tzavélla retired 
to Khortia, two hours from Suli. From thence he was persuaded 
to go to Ioannina, where the Pasha prevailed upon him to under- 
take a mediatory mission to Suli, with the view of persuading 
the Suliotes to agree to his terms; or if that should be 
unsuccessful, to bring away with him all his adherents (οἱ 
Τζαβελλάτες). The Suliotes rejected the Pasha’s offers, and 


' The castle of Kakia on Mount Kughni. 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 517 


endeavoured to prevent Foto from returning; but he was faithful 
to his engagement. Nevertheless, on returning to Ioannina, he 
was not admitted to the presence of Aly, but sent to Mukhtar 
Pasha, who ordered him to prison. 

In May 1803 the Suliotes received 3000 lbs. of powder and 
6000 Ibs. of lead from the French, which alarmed all the Musul- 
mans of Albania, and set all the neutral neighbours of Suli against 
them. It enabled the Vezir also to obtain an order from the 
Porte to reduce Suli. Of all the points in the πολιορκία, the 
most annoying to the Suliotes was Vyla, or Vilia, (Βύλα, or 
Βήλια,) where was a square castle, with a tower at each angle 
and another in the centre. One dark night they contrived to 
undermine and blow up one of the towers; and from thence 
by making a breach in the central tower, to obtain possession 
of the lower part of it. The besieged in the upper story then 
pretended to surrender, but fired upon the Suliotes as they ap- 
proached; upon which the latter collected wood in the lower 
part of the tower, and setting fire to it, suffocated, or burnt, or 
otherwise slew all the enemy in the tower, to the number of one 
hundred and sixty. 

Aly now renewed the siege with vigour, and collected a great 
number of Tzamidhes, and even some Greek captains of arma- 
toli(Kamravéo τῶν ἀρματωλῶν). Vely Pasha took the command : 
his head-quarters were at Tzangari, (Τζαγκάρι,) two hours from 
Suli, with 7000 men. The Muhurdar(seal-bearer) of the Vezir, and 
Metzobén, were at Vyla with 5000. Hassan Tzapari and Ibrahim 
Démi at Zaviikho, an hour and a half distant, with 4500. Bekir 
Tzokadér at Seritziana, four hours distant, with 3000. Yusuf 
Arapi at Tzekurati, three hours and a half distant, with 4000. 
Notwithstanding this great force, the Suliotes were still success- 
ful in making sudden attacks upon the enemy, by which they 
continually harassed him, and often cut off small parties. The 
women were equally active in obtaining supplies of provision ; 
accompanying detachments of armed men over the woods and 
bye-paths, (λόγγους καὶ στενώματα,) and returning loaded. 

Samuel, among other means of persuading the Suliotes to a 
determined resistance, pretended to have a knowledge of futu- 
rity, and predicting that the Musulmans would soon retire, 
advised the Suliotes for a time not to fight. (He probably wished 


518 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


to entice the enemy into the inmost ravines, and thus to bring 
about such a result as had occurred in 1792.) The Vezir’s 
Albanians, having approached the last strong-holds of Suli, made 
a triple attack at Kiafa, Samoniva, and the mill of Dala, (εἰς 
τὸν μῦλον τοῦ Nrdda,) but were repulsed at all those places, with 
the loss of 400 men. Two more traitors now revealed themselves : 
Kutzonika and Pylio Gusi (Πύλιος Toven); the latter, on re- 
ceiving twelve purses and the liberty of his son-in-law, who was 
in prison at Ioannina, conducted 200 of the enemy into his own 
house at Suli in the night, when Vely Pasha, making at the same 
time a general attack, the village of Suli, in which there were 
only fifty-five men, was lost. These men resisted for some time 
at the hill in Suli, on which stood churches dedicated to St. Do- 
natus and St. Elias ; but, receiving no succour, they were obliged 
to retire, and not only Suli was taken, but Avariko also, the de- 
fenders of which retired into Kiafa. This fatal blow was re- 
ceived on the 3d of September, 1803. Vely then built Kules, 
and brought cannon and mortars against the remaining castles. 
On the 11th of November Foto Tzavélla arrived from loannina : 
he had been sent by Aly to bring away the Tzavellates, leaving 
his wife and children as hostages at Ioannina. Secretly entering 
Kiafa, he persuaded the Suliotes to seize this opportunity of re- 
lieving themselves of their old and ineffective men, and to take 
hostages for them from the Vezir, as if they were able-bodied. 
He then went to Parga, to request the Parghini, as soon as the 
hostages arrived, to send them over to Corfii and Paxts. But as 
this could not be done without the permission of the Russians, 
whose consent did not arrive from Corfti for fifteen days, Foto 
quitted Parga and went to Margariti, in order not to excite the 
suspicions of Vely Pasha at Suli, and of Aly at Ioannina. At 
Margariti, having received information that the Zervates had 
been gained over to the cause of the Vezir by Botzari and Kut- 
zonika, and had deserted from Kiafa, he was sensible that no 
hope remained for Suli but in his own exertions, and proceeded 
with all the relatives whom he could collect to shut himself up 
with Samuel in the last remaining post on Mount Kughni. 

At this moment Aly arrived at Suli, and demanded of Foto 
the fulfilment of his engagements. He refused, leaving the 
Vezir to dispose as he would of his wife and children. Vely’s 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 519 


Albanians attacked the place in great numbers, but were met 
outside the wall by 150 Suliotes, who fought for seven hours 
with musquets, swords, and stones. The assailants lost 700 men. 
Of the Suliotes there were 11 killed and 14 wounded, and among 
the former three women. Being now entirely deprived of water, 
the besieged entered into a parley with Vely, who gave them a 
written promise of free permission to depart, expressed in the 
strongest terms, and signed by all the chief Beys and Agas; it 
was dated the 12th of December, 1803. The following were the 
names affixed to it :—Elimas Bey of Libokhovo; Ismail Bey of 
Konitza; Muhamméd Muhurdar; Pasho Bey; Ismail Dervish ; 
Hassan Bey; Ago Muhurdaér; Andin Zarkani; Omer Dervish; 
Metzobon; Hadji Bedéto; Elatif Khodja; Hussa Metakosta ; 
Ambaz Tepeléna. 

Foto Tzavélla, Dhimo Dhraku, Tzima Zerva, and Tusa Zerva, 
taking two-thirds of the Suliotes, accompanied by some children 
of the Agas as hostages, moved towards Parga, while Kitzo 
Botzari, Kutzonika, and Palaska, marched to Zalongo (Za- 
λογκον). Samuel remained with five Suliotes at Kughni, to 
give up the ammunition which remained there. During this 
operation, one of the enemy asked Samuel what punishment he 
thought the Vezir would inflict: upon him. Samuel gave an 
insulting answer, and immediately setting fire to the gunpowder, 
destroyed himself and all who were with him, except two Su- 
liotes, who are the witnesses that such was the fact. 

Vely, being now master of all Suli, immediately sent 4000 
men on the road to Parga to attack the Suliotes, in direct viola- 
tion of his promises, but too late to effect his purpose. The 
Parghini refused to give them up, and Count Mocenigo, the 
Russian plenipotentiary, residing with the Septinsular Republic, 
allowed them to take refuge in the islands. After a short repose 
the Vezir’s troops marched from Suli to Zalongo. The Suliotes 
had necessaries for two days only. Several of the women, 
despairing of escape, surrounded as they were on the summit of 
the hill of Zalongo, destroyed themselves and their children, by 
throwing the latter over the rocks, and themselves afterwards. 
Some of these’ women were not killed by the fall, either because 
they fell on the bodies of their children, or because they were 
caught by their clothes on the points of the rocks. This hap- 


520 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


pened in the day. In the ensuing night, the men, dividing 
themselves into three bodies, and placing the remaining women 
and children in the middle, forced their way through the enemy. 
Several of the men carried a child in one hand, and a sword in 
the other; twenty of them were slain in the attempt, many were 
made prisoners : the rest escaped by dispersing themselves in the 
woods and mountains. Three fourths, or about 150, escaped 
towards Parga; the remainder were taken, and after having been 
sent to join the other prisoners at Ioannina, were forwarded, 
together with a portion of the latter, to Vurgaréli, a village of 
80 houses at the foot of Mount Tzumérka, 6 hours from Arta, 
which had for some time past been inhabited by Kitzo Botzari, 
and the Suliotes who had at different times seceded. At 
Riniassa, where 20 Suliote families were residing by permission 
of Aly Pasha, a body of Vely’s troops finding no men there, 
murdered or carried off all the women and children. In this 
village there was a tower called the tower of Dhimtla (Κοῦλα 
τοῦ Anpovda), inhabited by the family of George Botzi (Μπότζη). 
Besides his wife and married daughters, there were his son’s 
wife and their children, to the number of eleven in all. Dhespo 
(Δέσπος), the wife of Botzi, setting fire to the powder in the 
tower, destroyed herself and all the party. 

The Suliotes at Vurgaréli. joined by those who had escaped 
from Zalongo, expecting some mischief from the Vezir, retired 
to a monastery called Seltzo (Σέλτζο), where a fair is held on 
the day sacred to the death of the Virgin, (ἡ κοίμησις τῆς Θεο- 
τόκου). It is situated on a steep rocky height, 8 hours from 
Vurgaréli, near a village named Vrestenitza (Boeoreviréa), stand- 
ing at the foot of Mount Frisia (Φρούσια), which separates the 
district of ‘Agrafa from that of Aspropotamo. One mile from 
Vrestenitza is the bridge of Koraka over the river Aspro. Pa- 
laska, who on escaping from Zalongo had presented himself to 
the Vezir, and had been well received by him, was sent to invite 
the chiefs at Seltzo to submit, with promises that they should 
be rewarded; but as they refused to listen to these offers, the 
Vezir determined to reduce Seltzo by force. In the beginning 
of January, 1804, his Albanians occupied Mount Frisia, and 
seven thousand men surrounded the monastery which stands at 
the foot of the mountain, near the river. Those who had lost 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 521 


relations and friends in the Suliote war were placed in the front. 
So small however was the progress made in the month of April, 
that the Vezir threatened to remove all the investing force, and 
supply their place with others, if the Suliotes were not speedily 
taken either dead or alive. In consequence of this menace, the 
monastery on the 20th April was attacked on all sides; the 
Suliotes having advanced beyond the walls, 50 of them were 
surrounded and slain, which threw the remainder into such dis- 
order that the Albanians obtained possession of the Monastery. 
The women were now more numerous than the men; a hundred 
of them met a large body of the enemy, and resisted for some 
time with stones, sticks, and knives. At length 300 Suliote 
men were taken, or killed; 160 women, many of them with 
children, threw themselves into the Achelous, and the remaining 
women were taken, with the exception only of Maria, wife of 
Ghioti Pandazi (Γιώτη Πανταζῆ), who with 55 men, headed by 
Kitzo Bétzari, escaped to Parga. The Vezir urged the Parghini 
to drive the Suliotes out of Parga; and Abdullah Bey, the 
Sultan’s commissioner for the ex-Venetian places of Prévyza, 
Parga, Vonitza, and Vutzintro, residing at Prévyza, wrote to 
them in the same sense. The Suliotes therefore were obliged to 
retire to the islands, where the Government assigned to them 
locations at Paxts, and at Lefka, in Corfa. 

A few months afterwards, Hassan Tzapari of Margariti, find- 
ing himself destined to be the next victim of Aly’s ambition, 
formed an alliance against him, consisting of Mustafa Pasha and 
Selim Bey of Délvino, with Daliani of Konispoli, Prénio of 
Paramythia, and Bulo Khusa of Margariti. Convinced that 
nothing could be done against Aly until Suli was wrested from 
him, they invited the Suliotes in the Islands to join them in the 
attempt. Musa, son of Hassan, went for this purpose to Corfu, 
and as it suited the policy of the Russians, he easily obtained 
their concurrence in conveying the Suliotes to Parga. Khris- 
taki, formerly a monk, but then holding the rank of major in 
the Russian service, accompanied them as agent of the Russian 
minister. Aly at this time had only 200 men in Kughni, 120 
in Suli, 30 in Avariko, and 60 in Kidfa. Hassan and his allies 
met the Suliotes at Parga, and signed a treaty, dated 2d July, 
1804. A body of the allied troops then marched into Fanari, 


522 ADDITIONAL NOTES, 


when, instead of attacking Suli immediately, Hassan thought 
only of clearing his own territory of the adherents of Aly; and 
as the Suliotes had engaged to be under his orders, they were 
unable to correct this ill conduct of his. 

Aly soon reinforced his posts at Suli, and all the Suliotes 
could do, was to take possession of Zalongo. Although the 
Russians sent to Khristaki an ample supply of kalambokki and 
cartridges for the use of the Suliotes, besides allowing each 
Suliote 225 piastres a month, they were left so destitute by the 
Russian agent, that they were obliged to forage in the neigh- 
bouring lands of the Greeks to prevent starvation. When these 
things were known at Corfai, Khristaki was recalled. Zalongo 
was soon surrounded by 6000 of the Vezir’s troops, but such 
is the strength of the position, that they resisted with success, 
killed many of the enemy, with the loss only of five men, and 
obliged them to retire. 

Five days afterwards the Suliotes, obliged by hunger, and 
seeing little hope of assistance from the Tzamidhes, evacuated 
Zalongo, and marched to Fanari, where, protected by entrench- 
ments (μετερίζια), they fought with a large body of the enemy’s 
cavalry. In the night they retired from this position, and in the 
morning reached Parga, with the exception of a body under Béiko 
Zarba (Βέϊκος Ζάρμπας), who, having been left 2 hours in the rear, 
with 30 Suliotes and 34 Musulman Tzamidhes was attacked by 
very superior numbers. They made a successful resistance until 
night, when the Musulmans wished to capitulate, but were 
dissuaded by Zarba, who assured them of his own determination, 
and that of the Suliotes, to fight all the next day, and to escape 
to Parga in the following night ; and this he performed without 
losing a man, while the adversaries lost 87 men and 27 horses. 
Thus the Suliotes on the 10th of September were again collected 
at Parga, from whence they returned to Corfa. As they objected 
to the European discipline, General d’Anrep, the Russian com- 
mander, formed them into a body of light infantry. Six com- 
panies of 100 men were formed, each commanded by a éxardy- 
rapxoc, two πεντηκοντάρχοι, and one σημαιοφόρος ; 104 in all. 
To these six companies were added four which were from Khi- 
mara, and the command of the whole battalion was given to the 
Russian Colonel Beckendorf, who was succeeded after a few 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 583 


months by Emmanuel Papadopulo. The number of these troops 
was increased, and they accompanied the Russians to Naples, 
against the French. When the Suliotes returned, many died of 
an epidemic disorder, which was often attended with delirium. In 
the war between Russia and Turkey, the Suliotes fought in the 
service of Russia, against the French in Sclavonia, and against 
Aly Pasha near Lefkadha. And at length, when the Islands 
were handed over to the French, in consequence of the treaty of 
Tilsit, they were taken, together with other Greek troops, into 
the French service. 


Nore II.—Own Parea. 


The following remarks on Parga are extracted from the same 
work as the preceding on Suli. The author’s date is 1801 :— 
Parga’ occupies a rocky peninsula of a conical shape, less than 
a mile in circumference, upon which the Venetians built a castle. 
There are 400 houses in the castle, and as many without. The 
place is not strong towards the sea; to the land there are 30 
guns: a garrison of 500 men is sufficient for the defence. There 
are two cisterns in the town, and a spring on the outside within 
musquet-shot, called Krémasma (Κρέμασμα). The territory, 
which is not more than 10 Italian miles in length, is of a semi- 
circular form, and consists of olive plantations and vineyards, 
with a few gardens and corn-fields, The port is bad, and not 
capable of containing more than 15 small vessels. 

About the year 1400 the Parghini’, finding themselves annoyed 
by their neighbours, sent four deputies (πρεσβεῖς) to Corfi, who 
took the oaths of fidelity to Venice on the 21st of March, 1401, 
before the Bailo Azarino Caravello. A more perfect treaty was 
ratified at Venice on the 9th of August, 1447, in the first Dogato 
of Francesco Foscarini. In 1571 the castle was begun; in 1575 
it was finished. The Castle of Margariti was built at the same 
time. The people of Aghia and Fanari were then so much under 
the same protection as Parga, that they paid their tenths (dexaria) 
at Parga. The Parghini at this time received from Venice a 
yearly donation of five modhia of salt for each married couple 
(καθε avdpdyvvoy), and three for each child. This was after- 

1 ἡ Πάργα, or, according to Me- 2 ot Παργινοὶ. 
letius, sometimes ὁ Ὕπαργος. 


994 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


wards commuted for 4000 médhia to be divided as the Archons 
thought proper. They received also a farther annual gift from 
Venice of rnyaviratc’, or pancakes made of oil, eggs, flour, 
and honey: of these the archons had 15, the resident strangers 
12, the priests and other official persons (Ἱερεῖς καὶ οἱ ἐν 
εξουσίαις) 36, masters of ships and strangers of note (οἱ 
καραβοκυραῖοι ἄρχοντες καὶ Eevol) 36. The Προβλέπτης, or 
Venetian Proveditore, residing at Parga, was obliged, moreover, 
to furnish two annual entertainments (δύο τραπέζας) of cakes 
and sweetmeats (yAvkiopara) for the success of the Venetian 
aristocracy (διὰ πυλυχρονισμὸν τῆς τῶν Ἑνετῶν εἰριστοκρατείας), 
one on Christmas Eve, the other on that of the Epiphany (Θεο- 
gaveiwy); to these were admitted the archons, priests, and per- 
sons in office. The Protopapas had a double portion (δέίπλον 
πιάτον). Jt was at these two feasts (éopraic) that the distribution 
was made of the tiganites’. The magistrates accounted to the 
Proveditore for the kumérki or customs, which were three per 
cent. on the value of exports and imports. They were collected 
on the Ist of May, and the seven days following, when there was 
a festival (ἐπανηγύρισαν) at the expence of Venice, which was 
called the Rosalia (ἡ "Pwoddia). On the eighth day, the Ῥωσα- 
Awrat, or keepers of the feast of Rosalia, had a sham fight (7ha- 
στὸν πόλεμον), of two parties dressed, one as Italians, the other as 
Turks. The latter were made prisoners, and carried before the 
Proveditore, who dismissed them with a present. It was custom- 
ary for the Proveditore on this occasion to pardon any exile or 
criminal (φυγὰς ἢ κατάδικος) for whom the archons might in- 
tercede. 

There were seventeen chief families in Parga; namely, οἱ 
Δεσιλάτες, Baowhdrec, Πετζαλάτες, Δημολιτζάτεςο, Στανελάτες, 
Ζουλάτες, Μανιάκιδες, Mavpoiwarvirec, ᾿Ιδρομένοι, Βέργιδες, Tht0- 
ρῖτες, Zovravéot, Παπύριδες, Λουμπέοι, Βερβιτζιώτες, Βρανάτες, 
Καλούριδες. 

It was customary for the Venetians to supply the Parghini with 
biscuit, powder, and ball, in case of necessity, and they had 


1 From τηγάνι, frying-pan. Porte by the treaty of 1800, they in- 

2 So tenacious were the Parghini structed their deputies at Constan- 
of their old Venetian privileges, that tinople to demand the continuance 
when the place was consigned to the οἵ the salt and pancakes. 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 525 


always the prospect of a secure retreat at Paxis. This enabled 
them still to maintain their little territory against the Musulmans 
around them, who looked with an envious and greedy eye upon 
this flourishing little Christian community, and whose increasing 
power and numbers caused the wars of Parga to be more fre- 
quent during the last century than they were before. In these 
wars they have sometimes been attacked by 5000 or 6000 
Turks, when they had no more than 400 musquets. In 
1801 they had 1000 armed men (ἄξιοι διὰ τ᾽ ἄρματα). When 
the French obtained possession of the islands in consequence of 
the treaty of Campo Formio, they deprived the people of Parga 
of all the indulgences which they had received from the Venetians, 
and for eighteen months left them to shift for themselves. When 
Aly Pasha took Prévyza from the French, he instantly desired 
the Parghini to send a deputation to confer with him. To this 
they gave no answer. He then dispatched a second letter, dated 
16th of October, 1798, ordering them to destroy or expel the 
French. They replied, that they were unable, even if they had 
been willing todo so. At the same moment, having heard of 
the arrival of Admirals Uschakoff and Kadri Bey, with the Russo- 
Ottomanic squadron, at Zakyntho, they persuaded the French 
garrison to retire to Corfu, and dispatched deputies to the ad- 
mirals, who were well received, and assured of the protection of 
the allies, but were recommended to cultivate the good-will of Aly. 
In consequence of this advice, a deputation was sent to the Pasha 
at Prévyza, who forced them, though declaring that they had no 
powers for the purpose, to sign a treaty, by which they gave up 
Parga to the Porte, and agreed to hoist the Ottoman flag, on the 
condition that they should preserve their ancient internal govern- 
ment, that they should not be obliged to admit any Turk into the 
place but as a guest, and that their tribute to the Porte should be 
no more than 200 floria of Constantinople per annum, with three 
per cent. κουμέρκι on their maritime commerce. The treaty was 
signed by Ignatius, metropolitan bishop of Arta, on the part of 
the Pasha. The deputies on their return to Parga were accom- 
panied by an officer of Aly, who was the bearer of a Turkish flag 
to be hoisted on the fortress. The treaty was disavowed, and the 
Turk was conducted into the castle as a prisoner, but at the end 
of ten days was allowed to embark in a boat sent for him by the 
Pasha. Aly then tried to persuade the people of Parga that he 


526 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


had received firmahns (βασιλικὰ φερμάνια) to take possession of 
Parga, Prévyza, and Lefkadha, and that they had better accept 
the treaty signed by the deputies. They replied, that the flags 
of the allied sovereigns of Turkey and Russia were then floating 
on their ramparts in conformity with the orders of the Russian 
and Turkish commanders. Aly, on receiving this last message, 
moved, in the middle of a rainy night, to Margariti (two hours 
and a half from Parga), from whence he wrote to say that they 
had improperly followed the example of the Island in hoisting the 
two flags ; that he had received a firmahn from Constantinople on 
the subject, and that unless they submitted, they should be ex- 
posed to his utmost vengeance. Finally, he desired them to send 
him deputies before the evening. This was dated, Margariti, 
12th of November, 1798. Their answer of the same date was as 
follows :— 

“‘ Aly Pasha, we salute you. Your sudden approach removes 
every doubt from us, and makes us resolve upon death or victory 
for the sake of our native place. We neither listen to Khristaki 
or any other of our neighbours. The smoke of our native place, 
and the innocent blood of Prévyza, are to us the wisest counsel- 
lors. Those which you call flags, we have received and venerate 
as royal banners, and under them we will all conquer or die. 
Your Highness comes against them, not against us. We are 
only faithful and obedient to the two sovereigns, who will not 
allow us to suffer injustice. As you inform us that you will 
remain where you now are till the evening, we promise you that 
we shall always remain here, and that for the present we are to be 
found in arms on our frontier. Farewell, and may God assist the 
rightful cause.—Signed by the Proesti and others of Parga’.” 

Thus disappointed, Aly next tried the admirals; he gained 


1 Ady Πασιὰ σὲ προσκονοῦμεν. 
Τὸ ἔξαφνον γεινονευμάσου τώρα 
εὐγάζει κάθε ἀμφιβολίαν ἀπ᾽ ἐμᾶς 
sai μᾶς φιλοδωρεῖ τὸν ὑπὲρ πατρί- 
δος γλυκύτατον θάνατον ἣ νικήν. 
Ἡμεῖς οὔτε Χρηστάκην οὔτ᾽ ἄλλον 
τινα ἀπὸ τοὺς γειτόνους ἀκούομεν. 
Ὁ καπνὸς τῆς Πατρίδος μας καὶ τὸ 
ἀθῶον αἷμα τῆς Πρεβύζας εἶναι εἰς 
ἡμᾶς δύο ὁδηγοὶ σοφώτατοι. Αὐτὰ 


ὁποῦ ὀνομάζετε πανιὰ ἡμεῖς τὰ ἐλά- 
βαμεν καὶ τὰ σεβόμεθα διὰ βασιλι- 
καῖς Παντιέραις καὶ ὑποκάτω εἰς 
? ‘ , , n > , 
αὐταὶς θέλει νικήσομεν ἢ ἀποθάνο- 
μεν ὅλοι καὶ ἡ Ὑψηλότης σου ἐναν- 
τίον εἰς αὐταῖς ἔρχεσαι καὶ ὄχι εἰς 
€ - e t " ~ 4 ᾿ 
ἡμᾶς, ὅτι ἡμεῖς τῶν δυὸ βασιλέων 


" εἴμεθα, καὶ ὡς πιστοὶ αὐτῶν δὲν 


θέλει ἀδικηθοῦμεν. ᾿Ἐπειδὴ καὶ μᾶς 
δίδενγε τὴν εἴδησιν ὅτι ἕως τὸ βράδυ 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 527 


over Kadri Bey by presents, but from Uschakoff he could only 
obtain that four Russians, four men of Kadri Bey, and four of 
Aly, should be sent to occupy the Castle of Parga in the name of 
the allies, which not satisfying Aly, affairs were left in their 
former state. He attempted in vain to seduce Uschakoff’s secre- 
tary, Major George Palatino, a Greek of a Livadhiote family 
settled at Kefalonia, and succeeded only in opening a correspond- 
ence with a family of Parga called the Καλούλιδες Τζιγνάνοι, but 
their fellow-citizens discovering the correspondence, expelled 
them from the place. Uschakoff, to save Parga from the fate of 
Prévyza, sent thither, as ἐπιτηρητὴς, Major Stekuli of Kefalonia, 
and afterwards Colonel Gabriel Palatiné. Aly represented the 
Parghini to the Porte as friends to the French and Suliotes, and 
as harbourers of robbers; but all he could obtain from the 
supreme government was a notification of its intention to send 
from Constantinople a Voivoda to govern the Ex-Venetian places, 
which took place accordingly. 


εἶστε αὐτοῦ, ἡμεῖς σᾶς ὑποσχόμεθα δώσῃ τὸ δίκαιον εἰς ὕποιον γνωρίζει 
ὅτι εἴμεθα πάντα ἐδὼ καὶ κατὰ τὸ ἀθώον.---Οἱ προεστοὶ καὶ ἄλλοι τῆς 
παρὸν εὐρισκόμεθα ἀρματωμένοι ες Πάργας. 

A , « , yy A » 
τὰ σύνορα. Ὑγίαινε καὶ ὃ Θεὸς ac 


END OF VOL. I. 




















SAF προ ae “α e onreinenai e 


papi aiiGe SA Rodina’): μειοῦν 4 yds jal avery γι ζοϑοῦ 
HOF boo get Bib Aa eae tho wining Ty {ch aa 

Ν gota ska ἄα  Ἰσιϑθαπ) μὴ) ἃ ὑ5η0' ΟΠ ΠΘΘΝΟΝ 
yeaa on ahs OLEH EAE Bieta jaw Sent iho 
Jase Tos ucdiow FP oa hiae Paria Sotqan ὙΠ ati! oar 
qilits? siohiluvi kee thos Saat ayhiitale To οὐίοθ 
᾿ ' OTS DATO: ἐξ ela: hehetictee by if 
ud sould gS Phe Akola νοι Ν᾿ 
δι εχ YRS Aa ori gation ogni, ͵ 
lo otal scl tsorl ‘eine θυ ῥα τον ΟΝ 
ον 1 τὲ te cOLad γι ἣν vik Ὁ ἘΝῚ ΓΕ 
eit) hol ate az χε ἢ ἰφῦνξαι) ΠΈΤΟΣ"- δᾺ 
ἔτ οὐ doa! #4 bel ΡΣ eb Mit 2G ° ER 
if ποτε sitet Delis of? Has tod pede 


: ire 


com of ao) holak ep ἢ ΟΠ Feng ime 


αὐ πο Foie irae 9 oT haa ae 


GILBERT ne RIVINGTON, PRINTERS 
sty owl yh Dake ΨΟΙΝ᾿ 5 δυο $n ἣ 
ΘΑ λὴ he Pu) τι oH γῶν sgt eae ly ay | iw yay ; 


ΤΌΤ 44 toa 
’ yi fat 94 





7 
~ eo * 
oad 
x 
Ψ 
8 
ft a OF 
¥ 
͵ “ ᾿ 
=- 
Ἷ 
ord " 
1; 
at : 
~4 
iP paren 
egg Solis vie 
4 3, ΣΝ Ἂν “᾿ς, 
bey te “ oe ms Ps 
ONS Seo ae 
γ “eel 
che pg ae’, ( 
7 la 
rm ben 
, igus κἂν yA, 
Rabies! 
: , 4 νὰ 
ν => Σὺ 
A 
ἐ i] 


End of VOLT. 


“ΞΕ πΞ' — 4 








THE RUINS of NICOPOLIS im EPIRUS, ie eects 


of Baths 


7 ὃ FLO C4 
2 edu “7 ff OM dt UN Ug) ly SET. Lone son ( 7237. | 
é é 










Scale of the buildings 


200 
10 20 30 40 50 Ha) 
= 








on OF the Great Theatre ὁ 

















ODEIUM OR SMALL TRUBATIRIE 






































|| || Tower / ||Tower 


Ι 














pusource 









ued 























τ = Ξ 4 L! 3 ῃ a0 δὴ Tombs ee qm Gach avrins 
Road ΡΝ 5 ie S58 “ὦ -- 
a =: “- CLE PELE on each side with Tenples & Tombs Ἧ egy yr "nl 
7 a Π = 4 —— - -------ς--ς-- 
a τ π ας --: 
GREAT TRUE ATTIRE 





a 
phim Ὁ yee 








ΤῈ 
τς ἀὖς0 A 
5 





ee AN sles 
SSS ——= 
- --- - AU EDU GT au 0 τ 














00 Yards 


Scale of the General Plan 
100 200 400 botapltce cr i sea Sam Sr a 








- ‘ 
ἽΝ 4 
‘ 
. 
ἢ 4, 
t 
» 
Ἵ 
ἂν 
ἣ 
= " 
Ps 
; 
τ 
a 
᾿ 
af 
ow 
. 
7 


ἊΝ τ Ww N , “na a5 oN Ws κι ty ἮΥ Ὅτ} 


ἘΣ LOL te %s vr 1H xn 







ἣν 


apevthill aed i be | 


Ri ae ne Δωρ 
» 
, 


My oRty he ae ‘svete Rh ARES 












a 
᾿ ᾿ 4 
ne τ 
asad ΓῚ BBA ἘΝ ΔΉ weg, 
, αὶ “᾿ Ls ' 
al Ὁ met Ἢ 





= -" 


=e 
ΣΝ 


Fee 


4 





ΡΟ 


ae. a νυ; τς Ἀν ὦ nl 
Ψ" 


ΚΑ, 


$ 


te tatee Ὁ a 


ZYPS PYM O VL 


IGGL PInsy pucg Max Tpapoy hg μου ey “οὐ poysnqng ‘PRU 7 1} 


















ATs ify ΩΝ αι ANE 









oooF ooo¢ 000g τς ᾿ Wy AYAP 2? Yung) ph » 
ΒΡαθχ Jo avo =| ἫΝ: M Wij, ax ates ἀπ Ξὶ 
ἥ .- NY ᾿ Ξ = ἢ " ΖΞ if WUD Z, Zs Wo oY) >= SS 
L$ MGV wre 

= 

533.) Fx, 
Me eS 
~ <= 
= | 

φρο FF = oe < 


προ ὦ Η i "ὰ δὶ yi) 


QUOT Jo Bpsny ὁ 
SHOBPUNYT JOUR T 
5 ΘΩΊΓΘΟΤ' VW 


OMT 2 PROT 


SLE) ἀχρολγ 


a 


Ἵ 


Ἂν 








νιν" 


hi: 4 
, 


Ὶ 


δὼ 





Δ} 
ἴω 
AY NN 


" 
i 

















WS = 5 = \ AN ν " ἢ " 
Ze, Ez S il 
TT alg 








» 
upoury ς 


δ ᾿ ὴ | 
TUN 


ΤᾺΣ 





Ws 
Fil 
Utee 


Dh 


wt 


Gi Soa δὴν 
: 777: ) ἣν 





ApYod aya ψϑηοωψ 
‘NONDHOV 


AY2 JO ASANO) PY2 
pur 


surmunop: bururolpy ay2 yam 


“TETAS 





LO TOA “0 PUL 





‘3 : ΓΟ! 
5 δε δι κι αλὶ ¥ & 
ἢ = eS γον, 


WEA τι cert 


wr 





avis eer hE ἢ 








ares 





“ ta ns me Acad πων. 








oe ὁ ryt ἐσ γα 


τσ 


WV?) At Bokhort. 


PINOYMENA 
ANTIMAXOZ 


2.9.3. dé Stsanz. 
ἈΛΕΙΦΟΥΣῊΣ THE 
TMOAENLEGETOYE 
SOAVTEVAPXONTOEZ 
TOYFTYMNAEI1OYS 
THdKAAYAIOYIOY 
AIMNOY LEH BAP 
XOYNTOZS T1Pe 
KAAYAILOYTIAPIANOY 


EPHBol ol YSTIOFErPA 


MMENoO!I 


tor the Names which rollow, see Chapier 7. 


SAS 


PY; 


422. Le Lepene’. 
NIK K $2 
AAMTINANOS 
NY4 at Apollonia. 
A-AIKINI-THPE 
€TWN ZE 
XAIPE 
V23, dé Apollonia. 
TITALOYAINKAHMEN 
TIZHEANTIKAAWC 
ETHMEHIAIATY 
NHKAAYAIA®EPINA 
ANAPEIKYPEIWECTH 
CENMNHMACXAPIN 


NC, At Kalabaka, at a Fountain atthe Church of Frodhromo. 
AYTOK PATOPACKAICA PACAOYKIONC 
TTIMIONCEOYH PONTE PTINAKAKAIMA P 
KONAY PHAIONANWNINONTIAPOIKOYCAP 


BIKOYCAAIABHN} ee EEE CUTE BAC 
-TONICAIFINIEWN 


N? 7 At Kalabaka, in theWvall of the pan Ὁ Church . 
-| KOTIOANICHATTE E€TTIKTHTO.- 


“OE PWOEICAYTIO OEP. OE - 


‘*ZENIK 


ANTITIATPOY2EAW YTOAIKEOTIONE. 
KENTHTNOAEIX KE ECAWKENTHTIOAE! 


TAMIA: OYCA - - 
NEIKANOPOC 
Ni€Yr AIKHIOY 
NOCITITTOAIO . 
QO. 


XK BS TAMIAONA 


EIWAMBIAOF.- 
TAFA: OYME. 
τε Res 


27. At the same place as the preceding. 
tS A ἘΝ ey 


AHMOKPATA 
ADY CEP. 


J Netherdlit Litheg: 


KETTHTACICOKEC 
C MNEIACKAPIN 


Li 


MOMMA a A CoAT | yorveu 


4 Νὰ πεν. 

᾿ rar. Pah ; Son 
δε τ ty ᾿ * ἃ. ᾿ uf 7 ἢ 
wh 


LW 







ῳ 


δ 
Ἄν 











ΗΜ 





yo 


dist ‘ wh ἦν, ἮΝ boa. ois ar IZA 


ὍΝ “as 























ΘΑΛΆ μάχη σιτ. “ἀφ 3ῈᾺ 

LA! 41d MNT 3 RPE Say 
dia 1 heen (ARH YoMAISAT 
ATW OHOIAMA - yee 
HISAX AR AAS) Ὁ o a 


Yor TERE ANID A" OAR 
LAMIAT ALA OREM Of ἢ γωλονιοι 
VA Vou Arnon nana : 
DAR IDY OTD! | IMOYOAIWM HES ad 

| Big. Meare 

xy ~ αν κα ν, ὁ Ὁ “ee ATES Lh ἢ ‘ 

OTN THI, 5. παρ ϑυλοῦν 
MINSR? 30. 739 οπγαδιϑθϑωϑϑ 
IAoOTI Ee: +AIAOTIY wa (o9 TAT ‘ 
ISAQTIH TH 3 Χ ὼ AD 1A KIAGT 
ANOALMAT.>@ ἡ € Υ 
TOME MALT ΣΕ 
ἣν ἀν. ra ea: Yor 
fines ie δ 
a : 

a sels VP yh μῶν iB as 


ene? ue 
Phen. ΩΣ 
ἜΤ π. 









οϑποθι ΑἹ ἘΥΠ ΥΊ “At 
HARI AIQIM 


N29. dé larysa_tn the Toun. N°10. Aé Laryoa_ in the Com 


46 TY. 


-NATOAHA PI AIONYCIAEPMOTENHNT 


ONEIKOYATIE 
EYOE PAHPRE 


ONEAYT HCA NA PAMNEIAC 


PHETHXAIP XA PIN H PWCX PHCTEXAIPE 


N°. At Larisa tn the Cemetery. 
AYTHFAIONTON \AIONANA 
MNEVACKA PEN 
HPWCXPHCTEXAIPE 


We ae. AF Larifga. aia fountain on Che Hastern stde. 


2EBAZTTONOEONTO KOINONOESSAARNN 


_V° 44. dé Fersula . tn the Wall of the Greek: Church, 


ee a ae a [ee 





| Ni WA HTOTEMETATOAYTH N 
᾿  ITEO@WEICTHNAWO IN 
| ee SER EEO 


TWEWNIEIAEMHO 
| | jrwew 









aan 
] AY BINATIAPANTEAAITIA N 









Wa72-27¢ Luria. ἐγε the Wall of the Metropolitan Chierch . 


ΑΓΑΘΗΙ ΤΎΧΗΙ 


TAPAA TITICOYONHCIMOY TOY 
TAMIOYTHCTIOAEWCTHNB 
EZAMHNONENCEPR ITITTOKPA 
TIAH ANATPAQDHATIEATWN 
AEAWKOTWNTOYCCTATH 
PALTHTIOAEI MAOPIOY< 
TEANECHOPoC ATACH KAC 
CANAPA HPAKACWNXAPI 
TALTPATWNIOYKOYNAA 


J Vetherdyt Lithog : 


Pel Le 










ntti «μῶν νὰ pon 7X, tated 
TH MITOMIDAID μοι δ 9 At a 
JAS ΜΆ Δ AIM TYAS KO 3ΠΆΥΘΙΝ 


A RO ὐπὸ 
igen) ΠΣ ας ἄρ. 
fananoia: navnoimnaya: χὰ 
An It ADA 


TAR TED ad | : 


Suc. seta οἷ Ὡς shea aoe ssi ee. 


=< 


λα τπομομδα οτνιοϑ φυτοῦ τὰ 
π ae Ὁ ὶ - 














ome x5 Pa) BAX \, LSE ἰδῶ we) ou 


“δ Soa ὦ γόθο κι 
» ᾿ ΨΘΟΝΕΒΒΟΝΝΟΝ a a a 
ee aoe ee . μ- 4 
= 
a tas 


— 


ee an - ep ale Ἄλλα 
δ = 


“γα σ΄, ..»-πογολδο. δὼ 


A nlAT1 (4/3 TAC ide 

ie: TY AOTATIM ATOTF au 

al Ὁ ΜῈ ΑΒΗ ΤΙ ee 
ἣ NOS TAARYWASE 
i ον 3 41a Hula 


eet. kee ‘p Deh akon 


i ‘ . 
HIT HOARY pes 


5h σ᾽ a 
"ar χολιδημογῳτιτα ‘SA 
GH T3A0T Hm a 
AIAOT πὶ FM Imo, HMA 


ΩΤ A AHOATT AMA i 
H TAT OY oT μον τὶς a 
SYOUPAM 13 ACT HES. 

_ DAA H BAIA 309 pe 3, 
AT AWD DIA DE. TH Aq 
: “ARO ae 





NUS. 1¢ Dhomoko. 
TOIZENTYTXANOYEI KATIAIANTRN TION I 
TANEYM® EPONTRANTHTOAEITHOAYMAY 

HZEANTEXOMEND EA & 
ZAITEANA Po ZO ENHNETITHT POAIPEXEIHNEXS 
ENTOIS AIATIETT PAFTMENOIZYTIAY TOY EYX PHE | 
ΛΕΩΣΤΗΣΘΑΥΜΑΚΩΝΤΡΟΞΕΝΟΝ ΚΑΙΕΥΕΡΓΕΤΗΝ. 
PATHETIOAERETH ECAYMAKINTATIMIAKAIQIAANOS 

TAIZTH E TOAEREYTAPXEIKAITOYTA Lo YS 


TPAMONTOYYHOI =MATOX 
ΑΝΑΓΡΑΦΗΤΟ-ΨΗΦΙΣΜΑΚΑΙΤΑΔ EAOTM 










N? 16. At Dhomoke.~ 
ATAOAITYXAITIOANIZOAY MAKIN 
EAQKEAFESTQIATPOAEQNOS 
-KAAALEITTPOZENIANETIINOM1 
ANAZYAIANAS@AAEIANENKTH 
LINATEAEIANTIANTQN KAI TIOAE 
MoY KAI E!| PANAZ EN TONATIANTA 
X PONON KAIAYTQAIKAIEKIONOIE KAI 
OLAToIZAAAOIZN PoZENOoIZ NAN 
TAA PXONTRNEO POAPIANE « # x4 A 
ΦΑΝΑΕΝΓΥΘΟΣΤΑΣ ΤΡΟΞΕΝΙΑ͂Σ 

ἸΤΟΛΥΜΝΙΑΣΤΟΙ͂Σ 
ΑΓΑΘΑΙΤΥΧΑΙΤΤΟΛΊΣΘΑΥΜΑ KQNEAQKENTIY PPA 
TIMATo Pox* Px **EIQTAIONTIEYEPFETA 
THI PO=ENIAN**OTIONITEIAN ENINOMIAN 
AZYAIANAZQAAEIANENKTHEINATEAEIAN 
ΠΑΝΤΩΝ KAITIONEMOY KAIE!IPANAEZKAIAYx «x * * 
E KFONOIZ * NTONATIANTAXPONONKAIOSA 
ΤΟΙΣΑΛΛΟΙΣ TI PO=ENOIE TIANTAA PXONTILN 
x «xxx * x *AlX|PAKO*NIKOMAXOY ENFYOLTAL 

TPOZENIAZNEOTTOAEMOSEYHOIA .. 


IV 7. At Necpatra. (a Fragment.) 


ree... KK... YAIMNAAY KOY 
N OMENONY ΠΟΤΟΥΔῊ MOYYHQIZMAEKT 


.7 LMetherciyt Lithog 





















Ae 


ROTI METAL AITAM a ; bo A 
e-eaumelet TAOMHT WL 
RUA Moxa thaw 
ΗΝ ἤρου THT ΒΨ ΓΗ ΞΟ 
Ἀμμ π ΧΥΞ ot YASH ‘S\oMamiAa 1a 
nNTEISAYS 1AM 4 Ona SSR 
(OHANGIDNA AIT AT Pye monet. 3 4) 
AY SIATYOT ΓΆΔ 3 KF ATY.23A0N SH -¢ 
ζοταν ΧΙΦΗΨΥΟΥΜΟΦΆ ΤΙ. ᾿ . ee : 
MIOLaA ARTIANAM 21 RY OT HBAS ΑΝ 






vs AMYA@ZIAGT LARC T MOA 

>A 2 3 ΛΟ |AINTZIIARHS AA: : 

pe 3MAIMa Sot Ae 

HTHAWAMNAT SNAG SA AEA 

3 ΛΟ IAA MARTHA MAI AS TAM 

ATH ANAMOT US ZAKAF (3 1ANYOR 

LAA ZIOWOTAS (AWINT VA 

Δ ΑΙ Zions =oF TI SIONAARL 

Anes : «ἈΔΆΜ cA bE MOE Mg 

Ke. MASON ZATLOYIAMGAT 

ZiIOTZAIMUMYAOTE | i 

At YTINa%sA3 Wo Ay a | 

ATA19 I YStTHOIATRIGee is 

AIM OVFITIS MAIS TIAONO mam WA) yet 
MAIS SATAMIZH TAMA aie "ἣν 

s+ #8 YAIAA ZAMAT IFAM Yomea 

A290 IAAY OV OF Bite 

VT VOX AAT ATT & OEE 

ZATEZOYI WA VO Ope τι Casts 

. MOHYZ 20M FAT los Wg 


; e 

Vi 

Ἢ i; seine 

᾿ Νὰ Pal ἐὰν bi 

. ‘ : 
~ & . τς “4 ; 
AY δ Ν “; 
en 


pee 


ν ἢ (Amomnr, » y δε BER 
-YOAYAAM RAY. i πῇ ΝΥ 
TIAMAT ame ΤΟΙ 
i. - ἘΝ ἱ 


«οὐδ. Sida oltie. Ne 














awen det ἃ αὶ Wed iint” i, JUN A 1958 


DF Leake, William Martin 

725 Travels in Northern Greece 
14 

» Pred 


PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 


UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 





ὦ «ἐν» * Διὰ & - δ OR. etm) ge ὡς 
Ca) ὦ eee oe - er - - 
Oa στό ρὲ. ὦ - ad = = ----ας. 
a γκ᾿ αἱ --. ΞΟ σα — 
-- “ποσῶν ὦ ee Ψ γος. μι 
am, oT πο - a — 
Pee, ee ὦ; - - 
ων σι Ὁ] 
Ὡ  - - 
SS ee ἀῶ, Tasos 
A ee a 
ei Se = 
EE al ee as ry ΝΕ 
is Sar αν Sa ὧν - ἋΣ δος — 
ἊΝ ΕΝ — ,“«.“α. --- 2 ὦ, 
Ὁ τῷ τευ a 7 
os oo α 7 oF ee whom are Ss 
OO Ome se we ὦ - ὦ ᾿ πὰ 
ee ee re rs re δα ap «ὦ 
cnet .-. tea - ᾿ μῶν ἃ 
=< OP “- ic ra τ“ 
ΝΥ ae a is ae Ce συ 
ae me ome “ας - digielieta ρων... - eo ὦ 
LA LL A ee ea tae Σ oy axiom, = ΡΝ 2 aos! @ 
a a eee a a Β ον δ iene ee ea ao a 
Pounder ae νς “ἢ et Ὁς 5 ee δια» -- 
Ὁ» ee ee ων οέάυουουνυ oe ae 7 - =, - ΄““-. τὰ» 
PA αν a ee mw OO a A. ah re mee ow ει 
SS NN ee ee te woes - ae κ᾿ a Dee, A aes en ye ᾿ 
Feta et he eS 6) ey an ge -..»............... ee eee . ν᾿ 
OE EO lw i να - = pe em we “ -- ~—— ie - ee - 
eee enters gece tele nt — ΡΞ τυ - " ——— _ 
γεν νθ σι αν ἄρκτον ee en OE ee eat an ae ul etter dita ΟΞ οσσα - - aa 
a ee « a an I ey eee “it Soa, “ne Sanam, “-" “--- - = & lie 
ΡΠ ΧΕ a . et ... .- “τοις κι κωσι οὐδῷ ταῦ γαρῦ, το τω, .-Ν as © et oe or a «.» μ 
ieee σιν ie  τ“«΄ἀὐονωννος πος OO at oo ὁ ὦ ile ὦ δος ΤΣ ΝΣ 
Ae Car eae, ihn, fe a te tae ae ae τ με κλαι ae said a ee ται 
αν» ον ne am tm Oe ὦ ον PE gee πον Sat al te shee ill! a a - — 
aerate ἐὁ μά» κα ἢ ΟἿ ΝΕ tl νὰ σα συ Atmel ssi a = a © πον 
συ δ ον Ἐν ae ea “οὐ edet aie νον ον ee —= oe Sen ln eins oe ᾿ 
imesh nae catientaedcelind ee Rn ae es ett Ξε “περ σωΝ toa ᾿ με: angie ΝΕ πε ας κι τιον στο ον σ᾽ ον 
“π΄ πτοία Ὁ σὰ = 7 te eee age Dafa gh a oe ee ee nl ὦ. te --- tintin te ee 
i aainiodnd. tare OS A A. hm sae mam PC, oa ge cia es - 2 ee a a teen 
ARE A ICC mt, ote © ee “6 τς ee μδο νας σφῶν “πὸ αν ϑσαα, ἀν ee a ΩΝ ας μα ὅν »- ὦ ee Es oe oem -...-: ai _ 
ee = eee ὁγῶ eo A CAO a ον nce ance yareeria-riaemme a ιουρ;ᾳὄ π᾿“ lt ohn a ον πύσοό σα ὥρα πὰς oe ἣν 
πεν οὐδ ΣΝ tt a A τ ep Amiens Siegen any bee λδονα «πὰρ ee a Ἐἕ 0 ee ha eg 
κοφααλα κσὐὦοὦΊν:-ἬὨ hk ge, σ᾿ a ae ee νον = mma = ι“Ψ]΄ῳ΄ teh eee A A he gee me τω el ey ea roma > yo one Ba ns nee a ee 
τα που Ree ay hag owns enon nS eh ae iat a wm, me gone IS Aa. AR tanh a mgs κα Seaman ee a ee 
πα πα σ«΄- «ςς 7 Me A me ne OE RN, assign ioe! τῶν coe mated. Gages iiediietadiontdie ae SS ee ah ree a I linger Brin li Mmm Se mL  ὐσδτΝ sien 
ES ST A eR ew ieee eae τ etanetnpene otinn asdiean eine πα ee eee ae Seka meme, ee OS et tp eae eee ΕΝ ——_ 
en aig Ota Sis τ λα, οι  οὐνθνο cetinsige egies oe ὐοττ τον τ δ σι, δον i ler ingen a, αν ιμΝ POY RE lh ep es me ape Paice 7 a 
ον, od ae wie EA A at PA AN σ΄ ραν nee EE PN ey “πὰ σι... πον OAT ee a ο. ie “ὦν me a ᾿ 
bp aetna te ee ipa creat are etree eas ee ey ee en ee ert. a ieee ol etiam LON ANN PIR epi oe le 7 a 
“τ ΣΎ ΤΎΡΟΝ Le A A A cy Oo ὧν pk I πε ahi = resem see γον το ee  s_ee Cece emt ak wy = 
PP Nh i Mt os ce ΡΞ atietnd-aienadhheon. wate ἃς. aap πο, ner teenie ne ce ee a νον δ σΝ ΓΝ - - x 7 
Jt eerie 1 ee oe ee "Ρ SE OO ae ΟΣ hemraathediedibeteiteeanetia αν πείσας, PEO A aT δ. nit πα i ee ρος ae . - a - α a 
αν ων νον, ΝΣ PO a: iiinitiniies= oe eee iep-eltrs peers guetta ee ee ST αν. “σον... - — -- ᾿ - — 
ee ne ee ie segs lee wa erga ee a ae a σασνι oF a mia ταν» ος- — ame τι. οἱ a — τς 5 
Rel A ως. δ σῶν αὶ Bae αὐ Σ᾿ poutine, α΄ aes πυδν ἄγρα καρ νευθ, το οὔτοι ον cd oes aaa δ Ἢ A A mtr 8 ~~ te - ὦν ᾿ — - ee 
en ae a A ee ΟΣ | a a tinge ae ema sane ericson ak me αν τοντς σαντος δ a a Le ———— chee a en eae = _ πρὸς ΝΕ — - 7 — ate 
Sc An τον = = igetge aig nee eS ὩΣ ΤΣ ΞΞ ΦΕΟΞΞΞΣΣΣ - - a eee a «as - 
ee ΕΞ — ae ὦ ζω» a ἀπ τὸν a OI σταῖς, ον διϑν τας φὰς τον τ ωισα aepenee—en nnn On a ὩΣ ὦν ne ς ee ea ΝΙΝ «--.- A eS ah ὡς ὅς ὡς aed - 7 βὰν ας ᾿ ST © owe Ἐς os mee 
stead Shemeiagieumadicdon meatal ae ee eo eae τυ ee one a awa meant pare Senge ee Nl EE σον μῶμον ᾿ τας se ge ΒΝ τ mane ᾿ be Minis a 
νὰ φρο i ore προ δι ον datos alien an oe ea aeananes nari ie mn ene te ge ee ne ae "ὧν 9 an = ᾿ ama = ED πον Bap th ee 
RO A Le A A ie ge a ee es mn es nn tt mara rem akin ΤΣ τοτο hg i tempts ae i gas = aaa cae ~— ~ + ae -,»“-- - Se me 2 ire: 
en A OE Ae σαν et ον ghee lige el nti an ee πὶ ὑῶν Ob me) = μῶν ee oe τ Ὸ 7 ΝΞ ἈΝ > ne εἷς, μ ε΄ ἴψό ὴ ees 1 somone Pe 
- πεν σα τ ρον, που στ ae σα πσον Se eng tid eet ge om _ “ες τς es ag papell πϑιδια, 7 στα - ae wearin 
“ὑπο τοσαμαν πῶσ ὡπ tae aan ee a aa σα; ES Ἀν le RD no me Stennett ee pa oa - atin Β - - “- be onan ἘΣ δα 7 - SS tS mee ee si me 
-- ag ee RN ee nen oe ae enn a ge eee ΠΩ Se ere eR τ ani iene op aot manamenennanais a κὦ i my ee ae ᾿ τ ΤΡ. τε ~ ~ - — δὸς -- 
LE LE OLE AR A τ ρμβοαν ὦ at a tare a om sonaee ean ee PES mn see eee "ἀν pom ee ae ae noe - —_ oo a αρδο a - ἔωσι ον oa en Se Waal δόμων om, cs 
edindididete ee ee a a ῇ΄πὐσαπσννᾳῳ τσ πον ὁ πασσ σκαν ~~ can inbsaiian anmemadin denn ras σι »ὶ μῶν την ἐγ ler ae - ee ES oe τς Roa a = anit on 
Oe a alan Rt ἐὰν alls meme se ne i ea = NS eae waa eon nea ae eR aan oe ineeilaemiaiiamnma on = a κὸν -ι-. ~ aS ion “- - = ἀξ, μα all - =a ~~ Ts ρῶν αν ae δὶ 
πο απο συ sae mage a ἘΞ ἘΞ ΣΟ ΟΣ τ τς rer ΣΟ πων et a ers cmap oe pga στὰ = τος << τς — ~s aa ae Pes 
πριν en in «αἰὸρεὶ;" τ So A δου σαν ας ς μ" Se παρ τ ρῶν αν μι μσρίστο, ὡκτσκαρνς _ a mead Seton oe ΝΙΝ ΟΝ μ Ν᾿ ᾿ Ke ᾿ φόνος ᾿ at ona hie ον 
σῶν νῷ iit SN cg a “ἀρ Ὁ ities | Se ae a an φτοῦ, eon es jem iepenceiliet ean ee σου - — on - a aye ie “- a --- ... εἰσ Sell Ὁ - - - a a. we 
LE Rt A aR. Νσο a a eee A ον οὁὌΕοὥΝ aah an hes gehen ma A at IN ih tg =e μα βοταν τ τυεμον ᾿ Ὁ aoc. = —_ a νον Soe ne ως _s - - — -» -“.- 
hati ee ee Oe SP np φωνὰν κων — Sn te hat oy σι, ΟΝ ~* ἄπο δος, ποῖ». « ne =~ a ᾿ τὸν a — a 7 pi its ra o-ohm = «ἐς; 
le yt aL eid et Pe eal nonce ee tele a DS I ieee ais aie slanting δι _ 7 ae ste ee en τοῖν ee ᾿ μῆς στῶν πρὸς ea ar ΓΝ μι δ ane τ, 
- αν τὺ τον το ον ἀαρονπόναν ten ΠΣ a ee renee ae tng ay 2:2. haplinsiineendl een oe ee ine fia ite ρος aura προς " ᾿" —, Se ra — βαρ --- a a 
A tm Ay Sept gin ἀν“ φρο aan CN ES ane ee Mae en SAR te Ae ποτ strana — alan ee a ape + ete eae περ macs oe per, 
ee ae ΠΤ Γιτεσντως τ τ πον ἃ See ES ln cee ae ΡΞ ΤΟΣ ΞΕ ΣΞΞΣΞΣΞ ————— he re ge Oe Sa ange ate = eee ore mi 
piel idle eee ee iuneiililisieiedasie nee a πὰ τ τ ὐδαδμδι ΡΞ ΥΩ nee wee eee πόνοις ier dietings apenas ae ee arate, rae ae fs ee ne ~~ Ὁ; a a sua Ψ ᾿ = ——— τον. 
rutieeieai eee a a ταν ee 5 a ae αὐτο ea δος ρον τ πΡΡῳααψήκ ΄νωασως comer nabeern Se sm samt ae omg Se ee ~ ΒΥ ~~ = μα τ geese με ΑΙ ει ᾿ — So νον, ὦν σα wagers 
eT ορορυ tens ον a en ate A pe en ΟΣ et A esa, -- a es © —_ Υ SS ee ce ere gi ee tg a pager 
aii ἀὐθυσνανθι πο πρῶ ὦ a ays στο πον τ eperer eaten eT το τθς ον» a nanan Mee me mee pe - bet ᾿ νὸς ποτ σατο τὸ - “ὦ αὐ ὦ 
ian ieee eteeniiaaialeeted aetna σι σδοναΝ inpedbnngtinesteeenaion ad a σαστϑμς Ὡρῶν, ae aes a eee i = ~* — — raat pa 
a me Na ri i ate a Fe ee nan ee ieestenaaenee κως σις a - am on oe ane - Peni oa 
το, πο ον i ae noenieuuuibidested deren χαμὸ κανοναιη ἄκας αν ΓΝ ᾿ ᾿ς _ ᾿ Ὡς Ψ Seen «αὶ ὧν ~ 
A, te pape ee ae mee oe - wee oe τοῦ --- 
a as 4.5... ew ae “πὰς ᾿ ταν Ξ' oe σα 
“νὰν ας “Ὁ aes on oa δὰ oa > eating filo 
at -.». μας ee —: - tp 
parent tee a ae - ~ μ᾽ ~ - jn ae 
einem ga ee a - 
os ne + «- - — 
- = = -.».. 
- 7 ean 
—— = - σ᾿ ga 
—— Βη 
- past a 
- 


