UNIVERSAL 

LIBRARY 



139 653 






ALBANIANS 

W O N D ER TA LES 

BY POST WHEELER, Litt. D. 



ILLUSTRATED BY 

MAUD AND MISKA PETERSHAM 

THE JUNIOR LITERARY GUILD 
. and 

DOUBLEDAY, DORAN & COMPANY, INC. 
New York 





Dedicated 

to 

Prince Essad Kryeziu 




CONTENTS 


Foreword: “ The Albanian Perralle” ix 

The Man Who Went to Find His Angel 3 

The Boy Who Killed the Dif 19 

The Man Who Understood the Speech of 
Animals 45 

The Boy Who Took the Letter to the World 
Where the Dead Live 67 

The Boy Who Was Fated to Be a King 99 

The Boy Who Stole the Nightingale That Was 
Galled Gizari 129 

The Girl Who Took a Snake for Husband . 163 

The Boy Who Played the Bousouka 191 

The Princess Who Had the Silver Tooth 219 

The Boy Who Was Brother to the Drague • 247 




FOREWORD 


The Albanian Perralle 

The ten tales which make up this volume — an in- 
considerable portion of the mass of fragmentary 
folklore known as Perralle , which has from earliest 
times been associated with the Albanian stock, the 
common possession of what is in all probability the 
oldest Aryan people in Europe — have been selected 
for their representative qualities and wide circulation. 

The texture woven of the Eagle-Men’s ancient 
folk fictions of which they are typical is a tapestry 
of extraordinary richness and beauty, as unfamiliar 
to the student of other European systems as it is 
characteristic. Their mise-en-scene is a wonderland 
weird and unforgettable, peopled not at all by the 
beneficent “ fairy 99 or the mischievous pixie or flibber- 
tigibbet of more northern story, but by giants, 
dwarfs, and witches as wild as the vast congeries of 
mountains and ravines which is the present-day 
Albanian kingdom, by talking animals and trees, 
flying men, half-human birds, and horrendous mon- 
sters that form a category distinctly its own. 



X 


FOREWORD 


There is no doubt that these fablieux are the per- 
sisting remnants of a myth mass enormously older 
than are the tales themselves. The presence in the 
more venerable fragments of the Mansion of the 
Sun and the latter’s Three Sisters, wooed in turn by 
the earthly Prince (the Spring), is clear evidence of 
cosmogonic character. But in the march of the cen- 
turies few such landmarks remain; the rest has been 
submerged by the invading floods of other cultures, 
leaving only a tangle of gorgeous wonder tales to 
enthrall the child and intrigue the student of origins. 

While from the days of the brothers Grimm and 
Hans Christian Andersen the folklores of northern 
Europe have received earnest comparative study, 
that of the Albanians has had, up to a handful of 
years ago, few collectors and scarcely more than 
superficial examination, while the general reader has 
assumed its tales to be in larger part adaptations of 
the inventions of other surrounding stocks. Such an 
assumption is curiously regardless of the facts of 
history. 

Probably no people in Europe, during more than 
two thousand years of racial vicissitudes, has pre- 
served a larger share of its heritage than the Alba- 
nians. And it is not to be believed that the extraordi- 
nary tenacity which has kept alive the race’s own 



FOREWORD 


XI 


language, social forms, and customs, and the body 
of its common law since before the beginning of 
written records, could have disregarded its legend, 
— that repository of its religious beliefs, its concep- 
tion of the physical universe and of the individual’s 
duties to his fellow and to the spiritual world by 
which it felt itself to be surrounded. 

The tale mass of the Albanians has in process of 
time come naturally to reflect many foreign elements. 
Persian, Greek, Roman, Mongol, Serb — each sepa- 
rate wave of conquest which flooded the land to the 
mountains, when it ebbed left behind it its peculiar 
flotsam and jetsam of legend. But this to the folk- 
lorist is readily distinguishable. 

Under the impact of the Christian and Mahome- 
tan faiths, too, the ancient tales have sometimes 
taken on new colors. The Guardian Ora, for example 
(“The Boy Who Played the Bousouka”), the 
Guardian Spirit who can foresee and foretell the 
future, is individualized in one tale as the Guard- 
ian Angel (“The Man Who Went to Find His 
Angel”). There is also the Shtoyzavalle (“The 
Princess Who Had the Silver Tooth”), the primeval 
air spirits invisibly haunting fields and forests, 
mountains, and the upper air: Christian tradition 
counts them the angels who, in the war between 



xii FOREWORD 

God and the rebellious Lucifer, doubtful of the out- 
come, remained neutral and aloof, and hence, though 
not condemned to Hell, cannot reenter Paradise. 

But these have retained much of their pre- 
Christian semblance. They can take on human form 
and are both male and female. The Shtoyzavalle' s 
tear, falling on a human being, causes the disease 
known as -pika [the drop], fatal apoplexy or sun- 
stroke. The female is as a rule beneficent, giving her 
milk to lost children and good counsel to folk in 
dreams. Holy men sometimes marry them. The 
male, however, is less friendly, punishing the un- 
witting intruder with lameness or blindness. One 
should avoid travelling the mountain trails at noon, 
when the Shtoyzavalle are most apt to be at their 
merrymakings. Some of the males are thieves and 
mischief-makers; their blood is black — if a man 
paints his body with it no weapon will wound him. 
Rarely the most vicious invade a human dwelling: 
this is the Albanian poltergeist. 

By a comparison of variants one can readily dis- 
tinguish the process of foreign assimilation. Some, 
current in southern Albania, show borrowings from 
the Greece of Aristotle. But as one follows them 
northward and deeper into the mountains, these dis- 
tinctively Greek features fade out and the primeval 



FOREWORD 


XUl 


earmarks emerge. The Albanian Mira (“The Boy 
Who Was Fated to Be a King”), in themselves 
specialized forms of the Ora, above referred to, be- 
come in the south the Fati [Fatiya], another name for 
these being Ethena [the Said or Destiny], identifiable 
with the Greek Parke, and not only foresee but con- 
trol the future. But as the legends travel from Attica 
northward through Epirus, the Mira become less and 
less the Fates and more and more the mere F amiliar s, 
slipping back to their primitive form. 

In High Albania every man has his Ore — lucky or 
unlucky in accordance with his character — which 
dies with him. It is white-faced [faqe-bardha] or black- 
faced [faqe-zeze] as he is good or bad. Hence the 
common curse, “May you have the black cheek!” 
and the blessing, “May the white cheek come to 
you!” It is the fulfiller of desires, the requiter, the 
bringer of good luck to the righteous and of mis- 
fortune to the wicked. So the beggar blesses the 
almsgiver with a “May thy Ore give thee good for- 
tune!” or “May the Ora see this!” The female Ora 
fall in love with and even marry human husbands, 
the offspring of such unions not uncommonly possess- 
ing certain occult powers such as clairvoyance and 
telepathy. 

When we trace the Greek Parke back through a 



xiv FOREWORD 

like development, from general to particular function, 
we are approaching a far older lore from which both 
stocks drew alike, as the Japanese pantheon before 
the Christian Era was to draw from the South Seas, 
and the mythology of Russian Christendom in the 
sixth century was to absorb from the heathen epos 
of the Slavonians. Some of the Albanian tales have 
ancestries so ancient that they classify with the 
so-called “Universals.” I have encountered in China 
a version of what is perhaps the most remarkable 
story in this collection “The Boy Who Took the 
Letter to the Land Where the Dead Live”) that is 
centuries older than the Great Wall, with whose 
legendary builder the Chinese modernly associate it. 

Of the monsters inimical to man which crowd these 
tales — in origin personifications of the unfriendly 
forces of nature, storm, earthquake, and avalanche, 
and the terrors of lonely gorge and beast-ridden 
forest — the great ruler is the Kuchedra ("The Boy 
Who Was Brother to the Drague”) whose forms 
are legion. It is by nature reptilian, its role being 
played in oriental and most European folklores by 
the dragon. 

It begins life as the Shliga, a small blindworm 
haunting dark caves or fissures in the ground. If it 



FOREWORD 


XV 


lives for fifty years without being seen by a human 
being it becomes a Bullar, after a hundred years an 
Ershaj, and after two centuries the dreaded and 
colossal Kuchedra, which preempts springs and 
watercourses, holds Icings and cities in fee, and can 
drink the sea. In this guise it is the chief actor in the 
Albanian variant of the Perseus and Andromeda 
legend, embalmed in well-nigh every myth epos of 
the world. 

In its lesser form it is the Lubiya (“The Boy 
Who Was Fated to Be a King”), the obscene haunter 
of the forest, and the grisly opponent of the Brave 
Prince in his quest to free the imprisoned or ensor- 
celled Beautiful-of-the-Earth. 

The Kuchedra’ s great antagonist is the Drag-lie 
(“The Boy Who Was Brother to the Drague”), 
the man born with tiny wings in his armpits, who 
from the age of twelve has the power of levitation 
and whose supernatural attributes, until he dies, are 
known “only to God and his mother.” In the region 
of Chelza it is said that the Drague can be born only 
of forefathers who through three generations have 
not been unfaithful to their wives. In the older tales 
the animal kind have also their Drague , so that the 
dog unbeknown to his master, the wolf, the bear, or 
the eagle, may be one. 



xvi FOREWORD 

Next to the Kuchedra in the descending scale is 
the Mamddreqja (“The Boy Who Was Brother 
to the Drague”), the Devil-Mother, the Old-Woman- 
of-the-Wood and Grandmother of the Witches. 
Curiously, in some sections of the country, the 
mother of the Drague is so called. She is ordinarily 
seen as the forest guardian of the Beautiful-of-the- 
Earth and a mistress of evil magic. 

Her lesser form is the Shtrtga (“The Girl Who 
Took a Snake for Husband”) who normally lives in 
the Underworld, that fascinating empiry whose sky 
is green, its trees black, and its sun red. The name in 
some localities is applied to a more horrible creation 
of peasant fancy — the vampire-woman that sucks 
the blood of children and bewitches her neighbor, 
who, unless hair from his head and armpit is burned 
with the proper incantation, is doomed to shrivel and 
die. This conception, however, shows no signs of 
great antiquity, and is doubtless a descendant of the 
more modern vampire, an article of faith in the 
Balkan peninsula throughout the Middle Ages. 

Also a habitant of the Underworld is the Dif 
(“The Boy Who Killed the Dif”), the Giant of 
these tales. The Albanian word is Gjigandi or Gogol , 
but the Turkish word Dif is more frequently em- 
ployed. He is not the castled Brobdingnagian of 



FOREWORD 


XVII 


other European lores, but a cannibal Polyphemus, 
naked and hirsute and covered with lice as big as 
grasshoppers, a gormand who climbs to the upper 
or white world by means of hidden wells to ravage 
orchards and steal away lovely damsels. 

His lesser form is the Katallan, whose name is an 
echo of the Catalonian company formed in 1305 by 
the Emperor Andronicus at Constantinople, which 
slaughtered the Turks in Thrace and Thessaly, and 
whose descendants were the Adriatic pirates of the 
fifteenth century. 

The Thopch (“The Boy Who Took the Letter 
to the World Where the Dead Live”), the Dwarf, is a 
lesser character whose home is either the Underworld 
or the tops of high mountains, and who is not as a 
rule unfriendly to human beings. He is sometimes 
called Herr. 

The Beautiful-of-the-Earth is the Albanian coun- 
terpart of the “Sleeping Beauty” who decorates so 
many folklores, — the desired of all desirers. She has 
many aspects. Her difficult abode is in the mountains 
or -secluded forest, or in the Underworld, where she 
is held in durance by Dif or Mamddreqja , guarded 
by enchantment and supernatural beasts, which the 
Prince-Rescuer must overcome. 

The versions relating her misfortunes and adven- 



xviii FOREWORD 

tures are a treasure trove for students of vulgar 
customs and superstitions. If, for example, the Prince 
finds her asleep, he must throw in her ear a bit of 
earth from a grave, so that she will not awaken before 
he has freed her from her enchantment. Thus the 
country robber nowadays throws a grave clod on the 
roof of the house he purposes to rob, so that those it 
shelters will not wake. 

She is invariably all-beautiful, often all-wise, the 
goal of manly ambition, symbol of good-fortune and 
happiness in love. 

One can assume that these tales passed through the 
inevitable process of dislocation till they reached the 
kaleidoscopic form in which they now present them- 
selves. The great number of their variants show their 
episodes combined in a thousand ways. The deus ex 
machina may be in one variant the all-wise Beautiful- 
of-the-Earth, and in another the magic jewel that 
overcomes all sorcery. The evil Witch-protagonist of 
one may in another become the Giant or one of the 
terrible reptilian visitants that haunt the primeval 
background. The modern tale-teller need be guided 
by no precedent, and is at liberty to combine the 
various stock episodes in any pattern that pleases 
him. 

In my own versions I have tried to retain so far as 



FOREWORD 


XIX 


possible the most popular structure, reconciling con- 
tradictory detail only in the interest of coherency, 
and without recourse to the extravagant illogic on 
which the modern raconteur is too apt to call to 
escape the impasse. 

I am indebted especially to the works of August 
Dozon ( Contes Albanais), Johann von Hahn ( Alba - 
nesische Studien ), Maximilian Lambertz ( Albanische 
Mdrchen), Holger Pedersen ( Zur Albanesischen Volk- 
skunde ), and Thimi Mitkos ( Bleta Shqypetare). I owe 
gratitude also to Mr. Stavro Frasheri of Cavaje 
whose volume, Permes Mirdites ne Dimer (Through 
Mirdita in Winter), is known to all Albanian stu- 
dents, and to Miss Meverette R. Smith of the 
American Girls’ School at Cavaje, whose students 
furnished me with a sheaf of versions as told in their 
own homes throughout Albania. 

Denied a nationality for so many centuries, the 
Albanians have no national written literature; what 
for other peoples has been crystallized in the written 
word has with them found preservation only in the 
retentive memory of the old. This residuum com- 
prises far more than the ubiquitous perralle or folk- 
tale: it holds animal fables, dirges, and epithalamia, 
aphorisms, love lyrics, occupational refrain songs. 



XX FOREWORD 

martial chants — a vast mass of material that bears 
the earmarks of an enormous antiquity, and that has 
been handed down, “ mouth to ear” as the phrase 
has it, since the remote childhood of the race. 

Fortunately, present-day Albania has a growing 
number of scholars who are setting themselves to a 
serious study of these fragments, that are of such 
inestimable value to the race’s history. And under 
the kingdom’s enlightened ruler, the first of the line 
of Zog, whose efforts are so unfailing to express the 
Albanian soul to a world to which the Land-of-the- 
Eagle is becoming increasingly familiar, these begin- 
nings should result in a consistent labor that shall, 
happily, rediscover for future ages a buried treasure 
that without it must be irretrievably lost. 

Post Wheeler. 

Rayleigh House > 

London . 



THE MAN WHO WENT TO FIND HIS ANGEL 





THE MAN WHO WENT TO FIND HIS ANGEL 

F I AN ANCIENT TIME, when animals spoke the 
speech of men, and even the trees talked together, 
there was a Toshk, of the South, who lived in a 
mountain village in the house in which his great- 
grandfather had been born before him. He had a wife 
and two children, a cow, a donkey, five goats, and an 
olive tree that bore each year seven basketfuls of 
olives, yet he was not content. When the sun shone, 
it was too hot; when the clouds hung in the sky it was 

too cold; when it rained it was too wet; when it did 

* 


4 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

not rain it was too dry. In short, he was seven times 
harder to please than a mother-in-law with the lum- 
bago. Moreover, he was lazy as a tortoise, so that 
people called him “Half-a-Crop” and spat on the 
ground when his name was mentioned. As for his 
wife, he led her a life that would make a stone image 
weep salt tears, and beat her whenever he stubbed 
his toe. 

One day he said to her, “I am tired of this exist- 
ence, in which evil luck has always pursued me. 
Here am I, living like a gypsy’s cur dog, with only a 
few coppers in my pocket, when by right I should be a 
Bey and a rich man, owning hills and valleys and 
having folk bow to me and make me gifts.” 

Asked she, “By what right shouldst thou be a 
Bey?” 

He answered, “Because of my greater intelligence 
and understanding. It is my fate that ties me down.” 

“If it is thy fate to be what thou art,” said she, 
“there is nothing to be done about it. If thou wouldst 
cease snivelling and work like other men, perhaps 
that fate would be a better one.” 

Said he, “Thou art insolent, and wouldst be better 
for a beating, but whenever I give thee one I get only 
hard words from the neighbors. As for me, my mind 
is made up. I shall have my fate changed.” 



THE MAN WHO WENT TO FIND HIS ANGEL 5 

“How wilt thou do that?” she asked. 

He replied, “Is it not said that every man has his 
Angel, appointed to watch over him and guide him? 
Mine is surely neglectful of his duty, else he would 
have led me to better fortune. I shall go and look for 
him, and when I find him I shall demand of him bet- 
ter service and my just deserts.” 

At that she laughed, saying, “A good trail to thee!” 
But when she saw him lacing new thongs in his shoes 
and putting all the food from the cupboard into his 
back-pack she was frightened. “Surely,” she ex- 
claimed, “thou wert but joking. Thou canst not really 
intend such a never-heard-of thing.” 

Said he, “I tell thee I am off to search out my 
Angel, as I should have done long ago. And I shall not 
come back till I have found him.” 

Cried she, “Whilst thou art gone, what is to be- 
come of me and our children?” 

“That is no concern of mine,” he answered. “Thou, 
no doubt, hast thine Angel, too, and he should bestir 
himself. It is his business, not mine.” And he put his 
pack on his back and took his stick and set out on the 
road, leaving her weeping, with the children clinging 
to her girdle. 

He trudged two days, he trudged three days, de- 
manding of all he met if they had seen his Angel, at 



6 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

which some laughed and others tapped their fore- 
heads, while the women he asked ran from him and 
hid themselves in the bushes, so that he was in an evil 
humor, saying to himself, “Who would have believed 
folk could be so ignorant?” 

On the fourth morning he overtook a Dervish in a 
white robe and green turban, of whom he asked his 
question. 

Said the Dervish, “This is a strange thing thou 
askest me. If indeed an Angel may be seen, how should 
I know thy particular Angel?” 

“Why,” the Toshk answered, “my Angel — in addi- 
tion to having wings, as is common to them all — is my 
counterpart, bearing mine own face and look. Are we 
not so taught?” 

“It is true,” said the Dervish, “that the holy writ- 
ings say something of the sort. But such sayings are 
for the learned, and their meaning is not to be under- 
stood without instruction. Many wise men hold that 
an angel has the power to take any shape he may de- 
sire. Moreover, hast thou never heard that a man’s 
Angel appears to him only once in his true form— 
when, having found him utterly worthless and fit 
only for destruction, he takes his final leave of him? 
Wish not therefore to see thine!” 

The other rejoined, “That is a tale told to keep 



THE MAN WHO WENT TO FIND HIS ANGEL 7 
those down who are down already, but I have not so 
poor a spirit. If an Angel is appointed to me, why 
should he not show himself when my need is urgent ? 
Nay, but I am determined to find him.” 

“What is thy need?” asked the Dervish. 

“My fate,” answered the Toshk, “does not suit 
me. I would demand of him a better one.” 

Said the Dervish, then, “A man’s fate is what he 
himself makes it. I advise thee to return to thy home 
and family and perform the duties thy condition of 
life lays upon thee.” 

But said the man, “Not I!” 

“Well,” the Dervish said, “as thou wilt, then. 
Since we are on the same trail, let us walk together 
and we can converse as we go.” So the man shifted his 
pack to the other shoulder and they went on in com- 
pany. 

Now the way led through a forest, and presently 
they came to a great tree which leaned above it. The 
tree was moaning and groaning so that all its leaves 
shook, and the Dervish asked it, “0 Tree, why dost 
thou complain?” The Tree answered, “In the bark 
of my side there is a rift and recently something has 
grown within it which prevents my sap from flowing 
freely. I pray you, travelers, to look in it and take 
away the.tjpng that causes me pain.” 



8 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

The Dervish said to his companion, “What sayest 
thou? Shall we not do so?” 

But the Toshk replied, “Nay, I have no time to 
waste. My business is too important.” So they went 
on together without pausing. 

They had gone but a league farther when the 
Dervish stopped and smote his hands together. “As 
to the tree,” said he, “I remember now that there was 
a certain sweetish smell about it. What if there was a 
store of wild honey in the rift of which it complained ? 
If so we could sell it in the nearest village for a goodly 
sum.” 

Answered the Toshk, “It seems to me also that I 
noted a sweetness in the air while it spoke to us. It 
could be nothing else but honey, as thou sayest. Let 
us hasten back and get it.” 

So they turned back, but when they came to the 
tree, Io, a peasant was working at the rift with a 
shovel, loading into his cart the last of a vast quantity 
of honey that his donkey could scarce pull, and 
thanking Heaven for his good luck. 

“Alas!” said the Dervish. “If we had but helped 
the poor tree we, instead of the peasant, would have 
had the profit. Now we have had only the extra 
walk.” 

“Did I not tell thee,” the Toshk replied, “that I 



THE MAN WHO WENT TO FIND HIS ANGEL 9 

am pursued by ill fortune ? However I toil, it always 
happens in this way to me.” 

They went on, then, over the way they had already 
twice traveled, and in the afternoon, crossing the 
mountain, came to a ravine, wherein the Dervish 
stopped. Said he, “Dost thou not hear a murmur as 
of far-off voices ?” 

The other listened. “Aye,” he said. 

The Dervish gazed about him, and said he, “Look 
yonder.” The Toshk looked where the Dervish 
pointed,- and beheld a great company of ants swarm- 
ing in a nook between two rounded rocks. Said the 
Dervish, “It is the ants speaking to us.” 

So both knelt down and inclined their ears, when 
the ants said, “0 benevolent travelers! We build our 
new city beneath this spot, and our tunnel has en- 
countered a great mass of yellow stones. Since we can- 
not go around them, we pray you lend us your aid to 
remove them, that our work may continue.” 

Said the Dervish to his companion, “Heaven’s 
blessing is on those who show kindness to all God’s 
creatures. Thou hast a stout stick in thy hand. 
Thrust it into the ground and let us take the yellow 
stones from the ants’ way.” 

But the Toshk answered, “What! Shall I waste an 
hour delving in the dirt for the benefit of insects? I 



IO ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

have a greater matter on my mind.” And he rose up 

and went on, the Dervish with him. 

They had gone a leagute farther when the Toshk 
clapped a hand to his girdle, and said he, “My knife 
is gone! It must be that it fell when I kneeled to listen 
to those ridiculous ants. There is nothing for me now 
but to go back and find it.” 

“Well,” said the Dervish, “that is not so great a 
misfortune. As I find thy conversation pleasant and 
have nothing to hurry me, I will walk with thee.” 

So they went back to the ravine, but when they 
got there, lo, between the two rounded rocks they be- 
held three shepherds digging furiously with sharpened 
sticks, and beside the hole they had made lay a pile 
of gold ducats as big as a barrel. 

Asked the Dervish of one of them, “What is all 
this gold?” 

The shepherd replied, “As we came along the trail 
an hour ago we sat down here to eat our bread, and 
the ants besought us to move some stones that lay in 
the way of their tunnel. We did so, when we found 
this gold, which is no doubt an old robbers’ hoard, 
and we three are henceforth as wealthy as kings.” 

Exclaimed the Dervish to his comrade, “Why, 
these are the yellow stones that the ants complained 
of! May my life be shortened if I did not jsay to thee. 



THE MAN WHO WENT TO FIND HIS ANGEL II 
‘Take thy stick and let us aid them!’ Had we done so 
we had this moment been rich instead of these 
shepherds.” 

“Was it not my fate not to do so?” cried the Toshk. 
“Art thou now convinced that I lied not to thee when 
I said that ill fortune clings to me wherever I turn 
my toes ? I will wager thee they have not even found 
my knife!” And he asked them. 

“Nay,” the shepherds answered, “we have seen 
no knife.” 

Said he to the Dervish, “What did I tell thee!” 
And he turned again to the trail, cursing as he went, 
while the Dervish went with him in silence. 

In the evening, on the farther side of the mountain, 
they came to a wide valley through which ran a river, 
and as they went along its bank, seeking a ferryman 
to put them across in his boat, a huge fish thrust up 
its head from the water, and said he, “O sirs! Take 
pity on my distress and aid me.” 

The Dervish asked it, “What is thy trouble?” 

Said the fish, “A month ago as I swam, I saw a 
bright pebble on the sand of the bottom and downed 
it. But it has given me such anguish in my inwards 
that though I drink from morning to night I cannot 
quench my burning thirst.” 

“How m^y we help thee?” asked the Dervish. 



12 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

The fish answered, “In the meadow yonder grows 
here and there a plant with a yellow blossom. I pray 
you, pluck me a handful of the blossoms that I may 
swallow them. For they will cause me to vomit up the 
pebble.” 

Then the Dervish said to his companion, “Why 
should we not help the poor creature? Let us search 
for some of the yellow flowers.” 

But the other replied, “Let it get rid of the stone as 
best it can! We did not bid it swallow it. I have my 
own affairs to attend to.” And he turned his back on 
the fish and went on, the Dervish with him. 

Presently they came upon a ferryman who set 
them across the river. On its farther side was an inn, 
and as the sun was now low they entered it and passed 
the night there. Next morning, as they were paying 
their score, the boatman of the evening before came 
in, and he said to them, “Glory to the feet that carry 
you! And may you find all good at the end of your 
trail! For ye brought me the luckiest of good luck 
last night!” 

Asked the Dervish, “How may that be?” 

He answered, “All my life I have lived in poverty, 
and of late living has been so hard that yesterday I 
said to myself, ‘If I get no passenger before nightfall 
I will drown myself.’ And I took oath up^rn the Great 



THE MAN WHO WENT TO FIND HIS ANGEL 1 3 
Mountain Tomori. But just as I was ready to throw 
myself into the water, you came, and your two coins 
gave me heart. I was tying my boat at my own side 
of the river, when a great fish besought me to pluck 
for it some blossoms of a certain herb which grew 



thereabout, that it might rid itself of a stone it had 
swallowed. Pitying its distress I took a torch from my 
hut and found the plants and fed the creature a hand- 
ful of the blossoms, and when it had swallowed them 
it vomited forth the stone upon the bank. And be- 
hold, it was no less than a diamond, which cannot fail 
to make me the richest man in these parts.” So say- 


14 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

ing, he took the jewel from his girdle and showed it to 

them. 

It was of such luster that the inn was as bright as 
day, and when he saw it the Dervish held up his 
hands in astonishment. Cried he to his companion, 
“Would we had showed charity for the fish when it 
appealed to us first! Our hardness of heart has lost us 
another fortune!” 

But the Toshk rose up with his face turned as green 
as young grass. “May the devil blacken thy fore- 
head!” he shouted at the ferryman, and seizing upon 
his back-pack, he took the trail, raging at the new 
blow his fate had dealt him. And the Dervish went 
with him. 

They met no more travelers on the way, for it lay 
through a region rocky and treeless, without habita- 
tions, and at length the Dervish said, “I pray thee, 
reflect upon the chances and mischances of our jour- 
ney together, for experience is Heaven’s gift to man 
that he may learn thereby. Do they not show us that 
recompense is given to the virtuous? Had we pitied 
the tree, we would have gained the honey. If we had 
helped the ants, the gold would have been ours. Our 
aid to the fish would have won us the jewel, But we 
hardened our hearts, and these rewards went to 
others who were deserving. Let us take a lesson from 



THE MAN WHO WENT TO FIND HIS ANGEL 1 5 
this and mend our ways in future, so that the bless- 
ings that fall on the virtuous shall be ours.” 

But cried the other, “Get thee gone with thy prat- 
ing! I begin to think that thou art a part of my evil 
fate, and I want no more of thee!” 

“Well,” said the Dervish, “if that is thy wish, we 
shall part at the next crossroads. But let us at least 
not part in enmity. And maybe we shall meet again.” 

Now as he spoke, lo, a huge wolf rose up before 
them on the lonely trail. Growled he, “O travelers, I 
pray you, give me your counsel.” 

Asked the Dervish, “What is thy difficulty?” 

Said the wolf, “Though I feed continually on the 
flesh of all beasts and birds, I go always empty. Tell 
me what food I must devour to appease the hunger 
that gnaweth me without ceasing.” 

Cried the Toshk, “Get thee gone, filthy brute! 
What is thy hunger to us?” 

But when he said this, lo, the Dervish suddenly 
swelled in stature till he was as tall as a tree. Wings 
sprouted from his shoulders, his turban became a 
circlet of brightness like the lightning, and at the look 
on his face the man shrank from him in terror. 

Said he, “It is I, 0 Toshk, that am thine Angel! 
Thou hast met me in many forms, and now I bid thee 
farewell. The fate that thou thyself hast made is 



l6 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

upon thee!” Then said he to the wolf, “The food that 

will appease thy hunger is the flesh of a man.” 

And with the words he vanished. 

This tale was told me by a man of Tinglimajmun, 
where the monkeys dance. Take it with you, and may 
we all have health! 



THE BOY WHO KILLED THE DIF 




THE BOY WHO KILLED THE DIF 


O NCE and once there was — you may take my 
word for it! — a Fling of a land beyond the high- 
est mountains, who had three sons. The eldest was 
named Rexh, the middle one was named Palok, and 
the youngest, who was as strong as the rocks and 
worth both of the others put together, was named 
Gjuro, 

The King had near his palace a great orchard sur- 

19 




20 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

rounded by a high wall, and in the middle of it was a 
quince tree, which was his especial pride and which 
bore each year three quinces. Always, however, they 
were hardly ripe before they disappeared from the 
tree, and the royal guards reported that a Dif, coming 
from nowhere, three nights in succession leaped the 
orchard’s wall and plucking one of the quinces, made 
off with it. 

Now the Difs are giants four yards tall, eaters of 
human flesh, which live on high mountains or in the 
Underworld — whence they come forth into the white 
world through hidden wells in the forests — and the 
King knew not how to save his precious quinces, for 
his guardsmen, so soon as they heard the Difs roar, 
ran away as fast as thrown spears. 

One summer day, when the fruit was ripening on 
the trees, Rexh, his eldest son, heard him complain- 
ing, “Alas, for my sweet quinces! What can I do 
against the Dif?” and said to him, “O my father! I 
will watch each night in thy orchard and guard the 
tree for thee. And if the Dif shows himself I shall kill 
him!” 

Said the King, “Nay, my son. Thou hast true cour- 
age, but how canst thou do what all my guardsmen 
cannot?” 

He replied, “I am a King’s son, and have come to 



THE BOY WHO KILLED THE DIF 21 

man’s stature!” And that night he took his bow and 
steel-tipped arrows to the orchard and hid himself in 
a clump of pomegranate shrubs to watch. He watched 
thus one night, he watched two nights, and on the 
third night, just at midnight, there came a roar like 
an angry wild boar’s, at which the guardsmen outside 
the wall fled as if wolves were after them, and over it 
leaped the monstrous Dif. He was naked and hideous, 
with ten curved tusks in his mouth that gleamed in 
the moonlight, and when the Prince beheld him he 
trembled so that the bow fell from his hand and the 
pomegranate leaves rustled all about him. 

The Dif galloped to the quince tree, plucked one of 
the quinces, and leaping over the wall again, disap- 
peared, roaring, in the forest. And in shame Rexh 
broke his bow in pieces and returning to the palace, 
said to his father next morning, “The Dif came and 
stole one of thy quinces, but such fear seized me that 
I could do nothing.” 

Said the King, “ Blame not thyself, my son. After 
all, thou wert as courageous as my guardsmen,” 

When the other two brothers learned what had 
happened, Palok the elder went to the King and said, 
“O my father! I shall take thy iron battle mace and 
watch in thy orchard. If the Dif comes a second time 
thou shalt see what I shall do to him.” 



22 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

“Nay, my son,” the King answered, “Thou art 
brave, but how canst thou do what thy elder brother 
cannot?” 

But Palok took the iron mace, and that night went 
to the orchard and climbed to the top of an apple tree 
to watch. And at midnight there came the dreadful 
roar, the guardsmen fled as before, and over the wall 
leaped the Dif. At sight of him the Prince felt his 
blood turn to water, nevertheless he threw the mace 
with so true an aim that it smote the Dif on the head. 
It bounded from it, however, like a pebble from a 
boulder, and he roared, “Ho! A rotten plum has 
fallen!” and plucking a second quince, leaped the wall 
and made off into the forest. And in shame Palok 
returned to the palace and next morning said to his 
father, “The Dif came and stole another of thy 
quinces, but though I threw thy mace and struck 
him, my strength was too little.” 

Said the King, “Blame not thyself, my son. After 
all, thou wert more courageous than thy elder 
brother!” 

Lastly, when he heard, Gjuro the youngest went to 
the King and said, “0 my father! It is now my turn 
to face the Dif. Only give to me the weapon I shall 
choose, with thy blessing, and let me try.” 

“Nay, my son,” replied the King. “Thou art bold, 



THE BOY WHO KILLED THE DIF 23 

but how canst thou succeed where both thy elder 
brothers have failed ?” 

Said Gjuro, “Give me thy magic sword from thy 
armory.” 

Now this sword would fight of itself, when its hilt 
was grasped, and it weighed as much as a weaver’s 
beam. Said the King, “Thou knowest not what thou 
askest. No man in my whole realm has sufficient 
strength to hold my magic sword.” 

But said Gjuro, “Let me at least try. For my 
strength has never yet been tested.” 

So at his pleading the King had the sword brought, 
and Gjuro took it to the meadow to practise with it. 
The instant he drew it from its scabbard it began to 
leap and whirl like a stallion, dragging him hither and 
thither, now whistling through the air and now goug- 
ing the earth like a plow drawn by eight bullocks, till 
he had no more breath- in him than a crushed frog 
and was forced to let go the hilt, when it fell to the 
ground and lay motionless. 

After he had rested awhile, he seized it again, and it 
dragged him bodily into the air, and dashed him down 
so that with the shock he let go his hold, when again 
it fell to the ground and lay motionless. 

But after he had rested once more, he grasped it 
for a third time, struggling with it with all his power, 



24 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

and so he continued, now resting and now resuming, 
till late afternoon, when he had grown so strong that, 
whirl as it would, his grip could not be loosened. 
Then he sheathed it and lay down and slept till the 
evening, when he took it to the orchard and sat down 
under the quince tree, with the sword across his 
knees. 

At midnight he heard from the forest the dreadful 
roar, and the shouts of the guardsmen as they fled, 
and over the wall leaped the Dif, who, when he be- 
held him, rushed upon him yelling with delight, 
“Ho!” he screeched. “Here is not only my quince, 
but man’s flesh to tickle my gullet!” 

Cried Gjuro, “Thou shalt have neither one!” and 
drawing the sword from its scabbard, turned the 
blade toward him, when it began to whirl so fast that 
the Dif grew dizzy and drew back dismayed. And 
presently it lunged a lunge that would have trans- 
fixed an oak tree, and the point, leaping at him, cut 
off one of his ears, so that, howling with pain, he 
leaped the wall and fled to the forest. 

Then Gjuro wiped the blood from the blade and 
sheathing the sword, returned to the palace and made 
report to his father. The King praised him for his 
courage, saying, “Thou hast done what no other man 
in my realm could accomplish. Now the Dif has been 



THE BOY WHO KILLED THE DIF 2 $ 

worsted and will trouble us no more.” But said Gjuro, 
“Nay, I shall not rest till I have killed him.” 

In the morning he said to his two brothers, “Let us 
seek out the creature and finish him.” Accordingly 
all three, Rexh with his bow and arrows, Palok with 
the iron mace, and Gjuro with the magic sword, fol- 
lowed the Difs bloody trail from the orchard to the 
forest. It led them to a cave, in whose depths they 
found a well so deep that one could not see the bot- 
tom. Said Gjuro, “Let us make us a rope by which we 
may descend into this well, for it will take us to the 
creature’s lair.” 

Accordingly, they gathered vines and twisted them 
till they had a rope long enough to reach to the very 
bowels of the earth, and fastening its end to the well 
curb, let it down into the depths. Said Gjuro, then, 
“0 Rexh, thou art the eldest of us, and it is thy right 
to lead.” 

But said Rexh, with his knees knocking together, 
“I bethink me that we are all like to be slain in this 
venture and our father will have none to reign after 
him. Since I am to inherit the rule it is my duty not 
to risk my life.” 

Then Gjuro said to Palok, the next eldest, “The 
right falls to thee.” 

But Palok answered, trembling, “Our brother 



2 6 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

Rexh is not strong enough to hoist us up after we have 
slain the Dif. It will surely be wiser for me to remain 
here to help him.” 

Said Gjuro, “Very well, I shall go down alone, and 
do ye two remain here. When I reach the bottom I 
will shake the rope once, that ye may know that all is 
well. Leave not this place during seven days, and 
when ye see the rope shake twice, pull me up. If I 
give no signal during that time ye may be certain 
that the Dif has slain me.” 

Then he kissed them both and with his sword in his 
girdle began climbing down the well by the vine rope. 
He went one hour, he went two hours, and at length 
reached the bottom. He shook the rope once as a sig- 
nal to his brothers, and felt about him till he found a 
winding passage through which he stumbled in the 
darkness till he emerged into the Underworld. 

Now this was like the white world he had left, 
except that the sky was as green as grass, the sun was 
red as blood, and every growing thing was black as 
ink. But he saw no living thing except grasshoppers 
as big as hares. 

He wandered about, finding no trace of the Dif, for 
three days, eating bushberries and drinking from the 
rills, till on the fourth day he came to two huge rams 
grazing, one white and one black. Thought he, “Rid- 



THE BOY WHO KILLED THE DIF 27 

ing is easier than walking,” and going up to them, 
leaped upon the back of the black ram. But it in- 
stantly began running swifter than a waterfall — so 
fast that he laid hold on its ears lest he fall off and 
break all his bones — through valleys and over moun- 
tains, till it came to a house built of black stone, 
where it stopped, and bounding high in the air, threw 
him into a deep pit under its wall, whose sides sloped 
inward. 

But that he was so strong he would have been 
killed by the fall. As it was he lay an hour senseless, 
and it was noon when he came to. The bottom of the 
pit was strewn with the white bones of men, and see- 
ing himself in such plight he said to himself, “Alas, I 
have fallen into the hands of the Dif, and he will have 
my life. For here I cannot use my sword and he can 
spear me from above 1” And he sat down, sorrowful. 

Presently he thought, “I am a King’s son and I will 
sing my death song and die like one I” So he lifted his 
voice in a song, and so sweet it was that all the leaves 
of the trees about the pit hung down to listen. 

Now when he ceased a voice spoke high above him, 
saying, “What! Amongst the thousand men the Dif 
has devoured was there a hero so great that his very 
bones sing?” 

At that he looked up and saw leaning from a win- 



28 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

dow in the house a maiden as lovely as a dream. Said 
he, “I am no hero, but a living man. I pray thee, 
whosoever thou art, aid me to escape from this trap 
that I may do that for which I have come here.” 

Asked she, “For what purpose hast 1:hou come?” 

He replied, “To slay the Dif of whom thou speak- 
est.” 

“If that is so,” said she, “I will right gladly aid 
thee. I am one of three King’s daughters whom he 
stole from the white world, and who have been his 
prisoners two years.” Then she unbound her black 
hair and twisting it into a single strand, lowered it 
into the pit and he climbed upon it to the window and 
entered the house. There she set bread and wine be- 
fore him, and when he had satisfied his hunger, he 
asked her where the Dif might be found. 

She replied, “I pray thee seek no further, for 
hereabout all things are his servants and thou canst 
never overcome him. Rather take me with thee to the 
white world, and I will be thy slave as long as I 
live.” 

“Nay,” said he, “I have sworn to kill him. But 
when I have done so I will take thee with me and thou 
shalt wed my eldest brother.” 

Said she, then, “Alas, I fear I shall never see thee 
more! But I will pray for thee. In yonder meadow 



THE BOY WHO KILLED THE DIF 29 

thou wilt find two rams grazing, one white and one 
black. The black one will carry thee to the house of 
my younger sister, where it will treat thee as its fellow 
has treated thee here. If thou canst win from that pit 
she will tell thee how to find the Dif.” 

So he bade her farewell and going to the meadow 
found the two rams. He leaped on the back of the 
black one, which instantly set off, running swifter 
than the wind, over hills and plains, till mid-after- 
noon, when it came to a second house, built of gray 
stone, where it bounded into the air and hurled him 
into a pit deeper than the first. And this time also 
only his great strength saved his life, and he lay two 
hours unable to lift his head. But at length he arose 
and seeing a window in the wall above, he took a skull 
from the heaps of white bones that littered the bot- 
tom of the pit and threw it through the window. 

And lo, there leaned from it a maiden as lovely as 
the first, who exclaimed, “What! Can the bones even 
of the mightiest hero fly through the air of them- 
selves?” 

Said he, “Nay, I who speak to thee am no dead 
hero but a living man. Help me, I pray thee, to escape 
from this snare, that I may do what I have come to 
do.” 

She asked, “What is thy purpose?” 



30 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

He answered, “I would kill the Dif who keeps thee 
his prisoner.” 

Said she, then, “If that is thine errand I will aid 
thee joyfully!” And she unbound her copper-colored 
hair and let it down to him and he climbed to her. 
She set food and drink before him and when he had 
refreshed himself, he said to her, “How may I find 
the Dif?” 

“Think no more of that,” cried she, “for no man 
can vanquish him. Rather take me with thee to the 
white world, where I will be thy willing servant for- 
ever.” 

He replied, “Nay, I have taken mine oath to kill 
him. But when he is dead, I will indeed take thee with 
me, and thou shalt marry my older brother.” 

“Alas!” she cried. “Then I fear thou art lost. 
Nevertheless, I will pray for thee. Beside yonder 
stream graze a white ram and a black ram. Mount 
the black one and it will bear thee to the Dif s palace, 
where my youngest sister nurses him. For he has 
recently been severely wounded by a hero in the white 
world. There the ram will fling thee into a pit ten 
times as deep as this from which thou canst escape 
only by a miracle, and when the Dif finds thee there 
he will spear thee like a wild boar and devour thee.” 

But he answered, “I shall have something to say 



THE BOY WHO KILLED THE DIF 3 1 
about that!” and bidding her farewell, he found the 
rams and leaped on the back of the black one, which 
instantly set off, galloping like the lightning, till at 
sunset it came to a third house, built of white marble. 



But before it could throw him into the pit that lay 
beside it Gjuro snatched the magic sword from his 
girdle and smote it a blow that severed its head from 
its shoulders. 

He entered the palace, and found himself in a room 
furnished in black, where on an iron stove food of all 



32 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

kinds was cooking itself in iron pans, with joints of 
meat roasting on iron spits and soups bubbling in 
iron pots, without a cook to be seen. 

He entered a second room, larger than the first, 
and found it furnished in silver, with silver chairs and 
divans and curtains of silver brocade, but no human 
being could he see there. 

He entered a third room, larger than both the 
others, and it was furnished entirely in gold. There, 
in a golden cradle with curtains embroidered in gold, 
lay the Dif, asleep and snoring so that the walls 
rattled. And rocking the cradle was a Beautiful-of- 
the-Earth with golden hair, so lovely that no tale- 
teller could describe her, and when he beheld her 
Gjuro fell as deep as the deepest sea in love with her. 

When she saw him, with the leaping sword in his 
hand, she cried out in fright, but he said to her, “Fear 
not. I have come to slay the foul creature thou dost 
tend .’ 5 

Now at his voice the Dif woke, and lifting his 
dreadful head, cried, “What! A man here?” And he 
sprang from the golden cradle, howling, and threw 
himself upon Gjuro. 

But Gjuro said to the sword, “Do thy work!” and 
it whirled faster than the eye could follow, so that the 
Dif ran before it. In vain he seized the cradle and 



THE BOY WHO KILLED THE DIF 33 

hurled it — the blade sliced it in two as a knife cuts a 
melon. He ran hither and thither like a snake amid 
burning bushes, but at last he could go no farther, and 
it thrust him through, when he burst like a bladder. 

Gjuro burned the fragments of his body in the iron 
stove, and he and the Beautiful-of-the-Earth feasted 
together. In the morning he set fire to the house, and 
when nothing remained of it but ashes and tumbled 
blocks of marble, he said to her, “We go now to the 
white world, where, if thou wilt, thou shalt be my 
wife. What sayest thou?” 

She replied, “Willingly will I marry thee, for I fell 
in love with thee with the first sight of mine eyes. Let 
us take one of the Dif’s white rams, which will carry 
us in three days to the Moving Mountains, through 
which we may pass.” 

Said he, “Nay, we must go back the way I came, 
for we take with us thy two sisters, who shall wed my 
two elder brothers. Dost thou know the trail to their 
houses?” 

She answered, “Yes.” So they set out together. 
Whether they went a short way or a long way, they 
arrived at length at the house of gray stone, where her 
sister of the copper-colored hair welcomed them joy- 
fully. They rested there one night and with her went 
on next morning. to the house of black stone, where 



34 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

her sister of the black hair greeted them with tears 
of gladness. They rested there one night and next day 
all four followed the backward path to the tunnel, and 
so came at last to the bottom of the deep well where 
hung the rope of twisted vines. 

It was now the seventh day, till which time Gjuro 
had bidden his two craven brothers, Rexh and Palok, 
to wait for him at the well’s opening in the forest 
above. Aware that Gjuro well knew their cowardice, 
they had been ashamed to look one another in the 
face, and had waited, sullen and sulking. At the end 
of the first day Rexh had scoffed to Palok, “If he kills 
the Dif our younger brother will think there is no 
other such a hero in the realm!” 

At the end of the second day Palok had sneered to 
Rexh, “Whether he kills the Dif or not, if he comes 
back with his soul in his skin, our father will count 
him braver than the chief of his army!” 

At the end of the third day they said to one an- 
other, “May the Dif have eaten him indeed!” So 
now, on the seventh day, when they saw the vine rope 
shake, they were in two minds whether to pull it up 
or not. 

They did so, however, and lo, at the end of the rope 
was the Princess of the black hair. 

Cried they, “Who art thou?” 



THE BOY WHO KILLED THE DIF 35 

She answered, “I am the eldest of three King’s 
daughters, rescued by your brother Gjuro from the 
Dif, whom he has slain. Which of you is the Prince 
Rexh ? For he has given me to him as his wife.” 

When Rexh saw her beauty he thought, “As for 
Gjuro, he may have the credit for killing the Dif if he 
wants it.” Aloud he said, “I am Rexh,” and received 
her gladly and kissed her on the cheek. Then they let 
down the vine rope, and hoisting it again, drew up 
the Princess of the copper-colored hair. Said she, “I 
am sent to be wife to the Prince Palok.” And Palok, 
beholding her beauty, received her and kissed her 
with content. 

Now when they had let down the vine rope for the 
third sister, and Gjuro at the well’s bottom was about 
to bind the Beautiful-of-the-Earth to its end, she 
said to him, “O my dear! I fear for thee at the hands 
of thy two brothers! What if, in envy, when they 
have seen me, they seek to do thee a mischief? I 
pray thee, test their love and loyalty, and when pres- 
ently the rope comes down for thee, do not bind thy- 
self to it, but a stone instead. Thou canst always re- 
turn to the white world by mounting one of the white 
rams, which will bear thee to the Moving Mountains, 
that open every midday. And from there thou canst 
easily find the way to this land of thine above the 



36 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

well. Promise me thou wilt do this, for if thou wert to 

perish I would die of grief for thee.” 

He promised her accordingly and she gave him a 
magic distaff which she carried in her pocket, which, 
when a knob on its handle was pressed, would spin 
a thread of pure gold. Said she, “Take this, and until 
thou givest it back to me with thine own hand, I will 
marry no one else, no, never.” 

So they kissed one another and he gave the signal 
and she was hoisted up, where she said to Rexh and 
Palok, “Long life to you. King’s sons! I who greet 
you am to be wife to your younger brother. Prince 
Gjuro” 

But when they saw her with her golden hair, 
lovelier than both the others as the moon is lovelier 
than two small stars, the brothers turned green with 
envy. Said they to themselves, “Is he to have not 
only all the credit, but this Beautiful-of-the-Earth 
into the bargain ?” And as they let the vine rope down 
to hoist it for the last time with Gjuro, Rexh whis- 
pered behind his hand to Palok, “When he is midway 
let us slash the vines through, so that he will fall and 
be dashed to pieces. After we are rid of him we can 
settle between ourselves which of us shall have her.” 

So that they did, and the rope snapped, and the 
stone was swallowed in the abyss, while the two 



THE BOY WHO KILLED THE DIF 37 

scoundrels beat their breasts, crying, “Alas! Our 
brave brother has been killed! How shall we tell our 
father?” And pretending thus to mourn, they took 
the three King’s daughters to the palace. 

Meanwhile Gjuro, at the well’s bottom, saying to 
himself, “Her wisdom has saved my life!” cut off the 
end of the rope that showed the marks of the knives, 
and putting it with the distaff into his breast, went 
back through the winding tunnel to the Underworld. 
There he followed his former trail till he came to 
where the two rams, one white and one black, were 
grazing. He mounted the white ram, which instantly 
set out running more swiftly than could be told. It 
ran one day, it ran two days, and on the third day it 
reached the Moving Mountains, where he dis- 
mounted and lay down to rest. Thus, when at the 
next noon the mountains opened with the bumbullim 
of thunder, he came through them into the white 
world, and set out for his own land, which was so far 
distant that a galloping horse could not have reached 
it in a month. 

Thus it was with him. And as for his brothers Rexh 
and Palok, the King heard their story with tears, and 
the whole capital grieved with him for the death of his 
son Gjuro. The three King’s daughters he housed in 
the palace as his royal guests, till the weddings of the 



38 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

two eldest with the Princes should be prepared. The 
brothers, however, went to him, and said they, “0 
our father, we have no desire to marry them, but we 
are both in love with their younger sister, the 
Beautiful-of-the-Earth.” 

Exclaimed the King, “Ye cannot both marry her. 
Thou, Rexh, as the eldest, hast the best right.” And 
he sent for the Beautiful-of-the-Earth and told her his 
decision. 

She answered, “I was promised to thy youngest 
son, Prince Gjuro, and his wedding gift to me was to 
have been a distaff that would spin a thread of pure 
gold. Only if thy son Rexh gives me such a distaff 
will I marry him.” 

Then the King sent for his chief goldsmith and 
said to him, “My son, the Crown Prince, must have 
for gift to his bride a distaff that will spin a thread of 
pure gold. Make me such a one and I care not what 
thou askest for it.” 

Exclaimed the goldsmith, “O King’s Majesty, 
never have I heard of such a thing, and only a great 
magician could make it!” 

At that the King was angered. He shouted, “Bring 
me the distaff in three days or thou shalt be hanged !” 
So the goldsmith went home weeping salt tears, say- 
ing to himself, “Oh, the injustice of rulers!” And he 



THE BOY WHO KILLED THE DIF 39 

fell to studying all his books on the properties of 
metals, but could gain no comfort from them. 

Now at this time the Prince Gjuro, after crossing a 
hundred mountains and valleys, reached the capital. 
As he passed along the street he saw the shops were 
decorated with banners, and asked one of the shop- 
keepers the reason. He was worn from the long travel 
so that no one had known him, and the man replied, 
“Thou art surely a stranger in the city! Our Crown 
Prince, on the third day from now, is to marry a 
Beautiful-of-the-Earth from a foreign land.” 

At'thatjGjuro said to himself, “Can she so soon have 
forgotten her promise to me?” And he sat down on 
the curb in melancholy. Across the way was the shop 
of a goldsmith, and through the door he heard the 
man bemoaning himself, saying, “Would that I could 
find the distaff that spins the gold thread! Without it 
I am a lost man!” 

When he heard this, Gjuro entered the shop and 
asked him, “What is thy need of such a distaff, that 
thou sayest thou art a lost man without it?” 

The man told him of the plight in which he stood, 
and Gjuro rejoiced, thinking, “My darling is true to 
me, and has done this to avoid marrying my 
brother!” Said he, “Take me as thy apprentice and 
give me wood and tools, and I will make the distaff 



40 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

for thee. But I must take it to the King with mine 

own hands.” 

The goldsmith agreed joyfully, and gave him an 
inner room and all tools and materials, while Gjuro 
locked himself in and spent the time making chips, 
till on the third day he came forth with the distaff 
the Beautiful-of-the-Earth had given him. He showed 
it to the goldsmith, who, when he saw it spinning a 
thread of pure gold, was enraptured, and clothing 
Gjuro in his best robe, sent him with it to the palace. 
There Gjuro exhibited it to the King, who took it to 
the Beautiful-of-the-Earth, saying, “Here is my son’s 
bridal gift to thee — no less than the gold-spinning 
distaff — and now nothing need delay your marriage.” 

The instant she saw it, she knew it for her own, and 
her heart leaped, knowing that Gjuro had brought it. 
Asked she, “Who has made it for the Prince?” The 
King replied, “My chief goldsmith.” Said she, “Let 
me see it spin.” But while Gjuro, when he exhibited 
it, had pressed the knob in its handle, the King knew 
not the secret, and try as he would, in his hands it 
would spin only a thread of wool. 

Said she, then, “O King’s Majesty, summon the 
man who brought it and let me speak to him.” 

He bade them bring Gjuro before them, and she 
handed him the distaff, saying, “Give it to me with 



THE BOY WHO KILLED THE DIF 41 

thine own hands.” So he did so, when she said, “O 
King’s Majesty, look upon this man. Dost thou not 
know him?” And, looking, the King’s eyes were 
opened and he cried, “My son, my son!” 

Then both told him their stories, and Gjuro showed 
him the piece of vine rope that bore the marks of the 
knives. The King summoned Rexh and Palok, who, 
when they beheld their brother alive and well, turned 
as white as curdled milk. Said he, “O ye false hearted! 
Know ye any cause why I should not this day have 
your shamed heads stricken from your bodies?” 

And they, seeing their doom upon them, fell at his 
feet, confessing their fault and praying forgiveness. 
Gjuro also added his prayer to theirs, till the King 
said, “Very well, ye are my sons, and this shall be 
passed over. But ye shall not inherit my kingship, 
and thy brother Gjuro shall rule the land after me.” 

Then he asked the Beautiful-of-the-Earth, “Is it 
thy wish that these worthless ones wed thy two sis- 
ters?” She answered, “O King's Majesty, let them be 
returned to our father, that he may find fitting hus- 
bands for them.” 

So this was done, and Rexh married the saddler’s 
daughter and Palok nobody at all. But Gjuro wedded 
the Beautiful-of-the-Earth, and they lived together all 
their lives in happiness, and Gjuro after his father 



Afi ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

ruled that land. But none of his sons was strong 
enough to wield the magic sword, nor has any man 
drawn it from its scabbard to this day. 


Here's your tale . I don't care a jot 
Whether it's true or whether it's not! 



THE MAN WHO UNDERSTOOD THE SPEECH 
OF ANIMALS 




THE MAN WHO UNDERSTOOD THE SPEECH 
OF ANIMALS 


O F OLD TIME in the Land-of-the-Eagle there 
was a farmer, young in years, but handsome 
and as strong as the rocks. His parents had died 
leaving him a melon patch, an ox, a female donkey, 
and a flock of sheep, and with these, by the help of 
God and the angels, he and his wife lived in content. 
Being of a generous nature, when the sun was hot 

45 


46 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

as the core of a fire and wayfarers who passed along 
the road were as limp as boiled macaroni, he used 
to call the oldest of them in and seating them in his 
melon patch, bid them eat of the fruit as much as 
pleased them. For this he would ask no pay, and 
when they departed would say to each, “Take a 
melon or two with thee, to refresh thy journey.” 

One day as he strolled in the near-by forest he 
beheld through the thicket a tree which had been set 
on fire, and by it was a monk about whose neck was 
coiled a huge serpent with jaws as wide as a fisher- 
man’s trap basket; and to his astonishment the snake 
and the monk appeared to be talking together, the 
man in his human tongue and the snake in the hissing 
speech of the belly-crawlers. 

When he saw this thefarmer crept close behind the 
bushes to watch them, and when thus he came within 
earshot, he heard the monk say to the serpent, 
“Nay, but for thee to treat me thus is an evil act. 
For have I not just now saved thy life? If I had not 
seen thee caught in the burning tree and held the 
pole for thee to glide down upon thou wouldst by 
now be a black cinder! And how shouldst thou requite 
my good deed by leaping upon me to strangle and 
devour me?” 

At that the snake in anger whistled and hissed high 



THE MAN WHO UNDERSTOOD ANIMALS 47 
and hissed and whistled low, and the man replied, 
“It may be true, as thou sayest, that man in general 
is an enemy of the serpent kind, which he kills 
wherever he finds them. But I am a servant of the 
God who created all living creatures, and I take 
not the life of anything.” 

At that the serpent snapped its tail and its eyes 
grew smoky red as hot coals, and it hissed and whis- 
tled high and low, till the man said, “As I cannot 
convince thee that to slay me would be an evil act, 
let us submit the case to a judge.. In yonder clearing 
a horse is grazing. Let him decide betwixt us.” 

Then the snake loosened its coils, so that the monk 
could walk, and he set out with its loathsome weight 
resting on his shoulders, the farmer following un- 
observed to the edge of th£ clearing, where he hid 
himself behind a pomegranate shrub to watch. There 
the monk called to him the horse, which was half 
dead on its hoofs, so skinny that its bones stood out 
like the ribs of a dust-heap umbrella, and set forth 
his situation, saying, “We ask thee to give judgment 
on the case.” 

And when the snake in its turn had hissed and 
whistled, the starveling nag drooped its neck awhile 
in thought, after which it neighed and trumpeted 
and whinnied. Said the monk, “0 Horse, how canst 



48 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

thou hold that it is just for the snake to devour me? 
Is it my fault that thy master, now thou art grown 
old in his service and can work no more, has turned 
thee out for crow’s-meat, and has already bargained 
with the saddler for thy hide?” 

Then the bag of bones snorted and whickered 
again while the serpent hissed its satisfaction, till the 
monk said to it, “It may be true, as thou dost argue, 
that man is greedy and selfish and never satisfied, 
but that is no just reason why I, who have done thee 
naught but good, should lose my life. It iff clear that 
this horse has a personal, grievance and is. unfit to 
pass upon our dispute. Yonder on the meadow at the 
edge of the forest is a water-buffalo which we should 
find an impartial judge.” 

The serpent agreeing to this, the monk carried it 
on to the meadow, the farmer trailing them as before, 
and there laid the case before the buffalo, which stood 
switching its tail with the grass up to its knees, 
begging it to give decision. 

When he had finished speaking it pawed the 
ground, and lowed and bellowed for a lengthy T^hile, 
when the monk smote his hands together in despair, 
exclaiming, “Though thou hast labored ten years 
under the yoke of thy master, dragging it with thy 



THE MAN WHO UNDERSTOOD ANIMALS 49 
shoulders, and though, now that thou art too aged 
for such work, he is fattening thee for the butcher, 
yet that has naught to do with my case.” And he 
said to the serpent, “This water-buffalo also is preju- 
diced by an unlucky experience of his own and cannot 
declare justly.” 

At this the snake reared its head, hissing and whis- 
tling and yammering with its jaws clip-clappering, 
so that the farmer, watching, looked to see the monk 
devoured that instant. “The poor man,” said he to 
himself, “for all his being able to understand the 
tongues of animals, is like to lose his life. But perhaps 
I can help him.” And he rose up from his hiding 
place, and catching the monk’s eye, when the ser- 
pent’s head was turned away, pointed to himself, 
making signs that he should judge the case. 

So the monk said to the snake, “Thou art animal 
and I man, and after all it is only right that this 
affair should be submitted also to one of mine own 
kind. Let us find a man, therefore, and ask his 
opinion.” 

To this the serpent could not but agree, and they 
went a little way toward the highway, when the 
farmer came from behind the bush and met them. 
“Why, here is one of my kind,” said the monk, 




was bent on devouring him. And said he, “We pray 
thee, sir, to render thy judgment whether this should 
be.” 


THE MAN WHO UNDERSTOOD ANIMALS 5 1 

Said the farmer, “All my life I have judged hard 
cases, but this is more difficult than any I have been 
concerned with. First of all, I must examine the tree 
where this occurred.” 

Said the monk, “That is easy,” and with the snake 
coiled about his neck, he led him into the forest 
and to the tree, whose lower branches were still 
afire. 

Said the farmer then, “Show me the pole thou 
didst hold for the snake to glide down on.” 

The monk said, “There it lies at thy feet.” 

The farmer took the pole and examined it closely, 
then said to the serpent, “In order to understand the 
case fully I must see how thou didst come down from 
the tree upon it.” 

At that the snake hissed and whistled, and the 
monk said, “It declares there is nothing easier. I 
have only to let it climb up the stick and it will show 
thee.” 

Said the farmer, “Do so.” 

So the monk held the pole and thrust its end into 
the tree’s upper branches and the snake uncoiled 
itself from his neck and wound about the pole and 
ascended into the tree. 

When it was there, however, the farmer dropped 
the pole on the ground, and said he, “I suddenly 



52 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

remember that I have on hand a piece of business 
far from here which will prevent my judging this 
affair.” 

The monk replied, “But it will take only a moment 
for the snake to come down.” 

Then the farmer took the monk by the sleeve and 
said he, “Thou art a holy man, and beloved by 
Heaven no doubt, but in this matter I can instruct 
thee. The case is now in the state in which thou didst 
find it, and the serpent will receive its just payment 
for the treachery it showed thee.” 

Said the monk, “Thou art right; I did not think 
of that.” And he went with the farmer to his cottage, 
lost in admiration of his cleverness. 

He stayed with him that day, he stayed with him 
two days, he stayed with him three days, and the 
third afternoon he said to him, “I must now go upon 
my way, but as the saying is ‘Throw a good deed 
into the sea and it will come back to thee in the salt,’ 
and before I say farewell it is in my mind to reward 
thee for saving my life from the snake.” 

The farmer answered, “I want no reward.” 

But said the monk, “If thou desirest wealth, I can 
make thee richer than any Bey in these parts.” 

Replied the farmer, “With my house and melon 
patch I have all I want.” 



THE MAN WHO UNDERSTOOD ANIMALS 53 

“Wouldst thou be powerful? I can make thee 
Governor of this province.” 

“No,” the farmer answered, “taking care of so 
many people would be great labor. I have trouble 
enough taking care of my sheep.” 

Said the monk, then, “Is there nothing thou 
wouldst like to have?” 

The farmer thought awhile, and at last said he, 
“It would be amusing if I, too, like thee, could under- 
stand the speech of animals. I have my ox and my 
donkey, my sheep, my dogs, and my chickens. I 
would like to know what they say to one another, as 
thou didst understand the speech of the serpent, 
the horse, and the water-buffalo.” 

Said the monk, “I will confer this gift upon thee, 
but only on condition that for thy very life’s sake 
thou tell no one that thou dost possess it. For if 
thou dost, at that very moment thou wilt die.” 

“Very well,” said the farmer, “I will tell no one, 
not even my wife.” 

So the monk breathed into his ear a secret word 
which enabled him to understand the speech of every 
kind of animal that ran or crept or swam or flew, 
and went his way, and the farmer never again saw 
him in this life. 

Now next day the farmer plowed a portion of his 



54 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

field and that evening, as he sat outside his door 
resting, he heard the ox lowing and the jenny braying 
in their wattle, and listening he could understand 
their conversation. 

Asked the ox, “0 my friend, how is it thou art 
able to lie at ease, munching good fodder, while I 
have to drag our master’s plow all day long?” 

The donkey answered, “Because the good God 
gave to me brains and to thee horns.” 

Said the ox, “Since thou art so wise, perhaps thou 
canst tell me how I, too, can save myself a day’s 
work now and then.” 

“Why,” said the jenny, “to-night eat none of the 
hay our master gives thee, and to-morrow morning, 
when he comes to take thee out to plow, do thou 
drool and dribble and he will think thee ailing from 
the sun and will let thee stay here all day idle.” 

So the ox did as the donkey had advised, and that 
night refused his feed, though from his hard day’s 
labor he was well-nigh faint from hunger, and in the 
morning when the farmer came he groaned and lolled 
his tongue out and rolled up his eyes. 

Now the farmer, having overheard the words that 
had passed betwixt the two animals the evening 
before, and knowing well the ox’s intention, pre- 
tended to be deceived. “Alas,” he said aloud, “the 



THE MAN WHO UNDERSTOOD ANIMALS 55 
poor beast is sick. He shall rest to-day, and the 
donkey, who will soon be too fat from lack of 
exercise, shall take his place.” 

So saying, he took away the last wisp of hay from 
the ox’s stall and dragged the jenny to the field, 
where he harnessed her to the heavy plow and plowed 
lustily till sundown, till she was like a broken wheel- 
barrow, and when the farmer led her back to the 
wattle, lay down so spent from weariness that she 
had scarce strength to nibble a carrot. 

Presently the ox lowed to her, “O my friend! 
Through thy cleverness I have spent a day of ease 
and quiet. How can I thank thee sufficiently?” 

Asked the donkey, “Hast thou lain down all day?” 

The ox replied, “I have not so much as lifted my 
head from the ground. A few more days like this will 
make a new creature of me.” 

When the jenny heard this she groaned, and said, 
“My poor ox, I have sad news for thee.” 

Asked the ox, “What is that?” 

Said the other, “To-day, while I plowed in thy 
stead, our master called his wife to him and said, 
‘The poor ox is sick and I fear is about to die. It will 
be better to butcher him to-morrow so that we can 
sell the flesh. Go thou now and bargain with the 
saddler for his hide.’” 



56 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

Hearing this the ox lowed in fear and asked he, 
“What can I do to save my life?” 

The donkey replied, “There is only one chance for 
thee. Get to thy hoofs at once and frisk and shake 
thy tail and bellow till our master brings thee the 
night’s hay, and when he sees thee recovered and in 
good fettle once more it may be he will lay by his 
intention to butcher thee.” 

So the ox leaped up and pawed the ground and 
snorted and bellowed till the farmer came and tossed 
a bundle of hay in the manger, when he fell upon it 
and began to munch as greedily as if it had been 
salted meadow grass, at which the farmer, who had 
been listening outside the wattle to hear their con- 
versation, having compassion on the poor beast’s 
alarm, said aloud, “Well, it seems thou art thyself 
again, so there will be no need to send for the 
butcher.” 

The talk of the pair together and the cleverness of 
the donkey had tickled the farmer mightily, and he 
went into his cottage chuckling, so that his wife asked 
him, “What art thou laughing at?” 

He answered, “Nothing.” 

Said she, “Only an idiot laughs at nothing.” 

“Well,” said he, “it was only something that had 
to do With our ox and donkey.” 



THE MAN WHO UNDERSTOOD ANIMALS 57 

“I have never seen anything to laugh at about 
either of them,” said his wife. “Tell me what it was.” 
But he only chuckled and lay down before the fire 
and went to sleep. 

Now next morning he said to his wife, “To-day 
we shall go to the mountain to count our sheep.” 
Accordingly, she prepared food and a bundle of 
quilts to sleep on and he loaded the jenny with these 
and mounted atop the load with his wife behind 
him and they set off along the trail. The donkey had 
a foal, which followed its dam, and after a time the 
foal, becoming tired, brayed to her, “Mother, I am 
tired. Why can I not get on thy back, too?” 

The donkey replied, “Nay, my child. Thou must 
use thine own legs. I am carrying two persons and 
all this luggage, and moreover, though our master 
does not yet know this, I am in foal and should be 
carrying no burden at all on my back.” 

When the farmer heard this he said to his wife, 
“I think the poor jenny is overloaded; let us get 
down and walk.” 

Cried she, “Whoever heard of such a thing! She is 
well able to carry double our weight.” 

But said he, “We shall walk the rest of the way.” 

So she got down, grumbling, and trudged behind 
him. 



58 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

Presently she said, “Thou gavest no thought to the 
donkey till she brayed to her foal. Why should that 
have made thee think her unfit to bear us?” 

He replied, “Ask me no questions, for I cannot tell 
thee that.” And at his answer she grew even angrier. 

At sundown they came to the sheepfold, where the 
farmer stabled the donkey and bade the shepherd 
kill a lamb and roast it for their supper. The shepherd 
took a young ewe and made ready to cut its throat, 
when the ewe bleated to its dam, “0 Mother! He 
will kill me!” And the mother sheep answered, 
“Baa-a-a! My child, I have borne many lambs and 
the jackals have killed all but thee. Nevertheless, if 
our master must eat thee, we can do nothing.” 

When he heard this, the farmer said to the shep- 
herd, “Let it go and choose another.” 

The man did so, when the lamb he brought bleated 
likewise to its dam, “0 Mother! He is about to kill 
me!” And the mother sheep replied, while tears ran 
down her snout, “Baa-a-a! My dearest, our master 
has had many lambs from me, and the jackals killed 
some and the wolves others, and the shepherd himself 
has eaten all the rest but thee. Nevertheless, though 
thou art my only one, we can do nothing.” And hear- 
ing this the farmer bade the shepherd let that lamb 
go and chose a third. 



THE MAN WHO UNDERSTOOD ANIMALS 59 

The shepherd did so, and this one also bleated in 
fear to its dam, and the mother sheep answered, 
“O my little one! Thou art the fifth lamb I have 
borne, and by God’s mercy ye are still alive. We are 
in our master’s hands, and if he wills this thing 
nothing can help us.” So the farmer said, “Kill it,” 
and the shepherd killed and roasted it for their 
supper. 

While they ate, the wife said to her husband, 
“When the first two lambs bleated, thou didst spare 
them, but the third we are now eating. Does one 
lamb bleat differently from another, then?” But he 
gave her no answer, and she lay down to sleep more 
angry at him than ever. 

In the night the wolves came and howled about 
the house, and the dogs answered them, and the noise 
awoke the farmer and his wife and he listened to 
hear what they said. The wolves howled to the dogs, 
“ Wa-ooo-eee! Let us come and take our meat. We 
will kill three sheep and one of them we will leave 
for you.” 

Now the farmer kept three dogs there. Two were 
young dogs which the shepherd made much of, 
petting them and feeding them of the best; but the 
other was old and feeble, with only two teeth left 
in his head, and he was lucky when the shepherd 



60 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

threw him a crust of mouldy bread and often slept 

as hollow as a cow’s horn. 

When the wolves howled thus, the young dogs 
answered them: “ Yip-yip ! Come and take the three 
lambs. We will yelp and bark and make great outcry, 
but fear not. We will not oppose you, and do ye leave 
one of the dead lambs where we can find it and eat it 
to-morrow.” But the old dog barked fiercely, saying, 
“Waugh! Come not here, or ye shall carry off the 
two teeth I have in your filthy hides! I who have 
eaten my master’s bread from my puppyhood will 
defend his sheep with my life!” 

When he heard, the farmer woke the shepherd and 
sent him to drive the wolves away, and when the 
man returned he said to him, “In the morning bring 
all three of the dogs to me.” 

At sunup, after they had breakfasted, the shepherd 
brought the dogs and the farmer said, “Kill the two 
young ones and get a pair in their places. The old 
dog I will take back with me to my house.” 

Said the shepherd, “What! Wilt thou kill these 
two and save the worthless one?” 

The farmer replied, “Do as I tell thee.” So the 
shepherd did so, and the farmer, after he had counted 
his sheep, set off with his wife for home, with the old 
dog at their heels. 



THE MAN WHO UNDERSTOOD ANIMALS 6l 

Said she, as they plodded along the trail, “The 
matter of the donkey and the lambs was curious 
enough, but thy treatment of the dogs was even 
stranger. In the night the young ones howled against 
the wolves more loudly than the old one, and surely 
they are the better and the stronger. Why didst thou 
have them killed ? ” 

He replied, “It will do thee no good to pester me 
with questions.” 

At that she began to weep and upbraid him, saying, 
“Thou hast ceased to love me as other husbands do 
their wives!” Said he, “How canst thou say so! 
We live together, we eat and drink together what 
Heaven provides. And never in my life have I beaten 
thee or treated thee with other than kindness. What 
more dost thou want?” 

She answered, “Thou art keeping secrets from 
me. 

Asked he, “What secrets?” 

She replied, “The secret that is behind thy conduct 
with the donkey, the ox, the lambs, and the dogs.” 

Said he, “If I told thee that, I would die.” 

But said she, “Thou sayest that only to put me 
off!” and when they reached home she sat down in a 
corner and left the fire unkindled and would not 
prepare the food or sweep the floor, till he said to 



62 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

himself, “If I do not tell her, she will give me no rest 
till the day I die, and a man might as well be dead 
and done with it as live in such a turmoil!” 

So at last he said to her, “Very well, if thou carest 
more to know the secret than to have me alive, I 
will tell it to thee. But since when I do so I must die, 
do thou prepare the meats and bread for my funeral, 
that my name be not blackened before our friends 
and neighbors.” 

When she heard this she rose up joyfully and 
lighted the fire and fell to baking and roasting, while 
he sat in melancholy on his doorstep, wondering that 
she could be so hard of heart, while the old dog he 
had brought from the sheepfold, having heard what 
had passed between him and his wife, drooped its 
ears in grief, and sat moaning in the yard with its 
muzzle between its paws. 

Now the farmer had a flock of forty hens, with a 
cock as their lord, and the cock was strutting among 
them, flapping its wings and crowing, and the dog 
said to the cock, “Woof! Takest thou not shame to 
thyself to be thus parading when our master is in 
such desperate case?” 

Asked the cock, “What is his difficulty?” 

Rejoined the dog, “He has a certain secret whose 
nature I do not know, which he may not tell under 



THE MAN WHO UNDERSTOOD ANIMALS 63 
pain of death. But his wife demands that he acquaint 
her with it.” 

“ Kek-ek-ek!” said the cock. “I see no harm from 
that.” 

Said the dog, “Her demand has so worn upon him 
that he will tell it to her and will die.” 

When it heard this the cock shook its wattle and 
flapped its wings with Ikughter. “Kek-ek-ek — 
Karoo!” it crowed. “If he is such a fool there is no 
help for him. We shall be much better off with a 
master of more sense.” 

Snarled the dog, “Oh, ingrate! How canst thou 
say such a thing!” 

Crowed the cock, “I have here forty wives, and 
when I so much as look at them they tremble. That 
miserable wretch has only one, and he lets her send 
him to his grave. Did ever one hear of such a jest? 
Kek-ek-ek — Karoo! ” 

Asked the dog, “But what is there for our poor 
master to do?” 

“Why,” the cock replied, “he should cut a stick 
from yonder mulberry tree as thick as his two thumbs 
and beat her till her back is as soft as a pan of mush 
and she has lost all desire to learn his secret, whatever 
it is! But no doubt he is too much of an idiot to think 
of such a cure for her!” 



6 \ ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

But the farmer on the doorstep, hearing, said to 
himself, “The cock is right, and animals are wiser 
than us men!” And he took his knife and cut a stick 
as thick as his wrist, and going in to his wife, he fell 
oil her and beat her till it broke, while she screamed 
till the roof tiles split. 

Said he, then, “Dost thou still desire to know my 
secret?” 

She answered, “Aye.” 

Then he went and cut another cudgel as thick as 
the calf of his leg and came back with it, but when 
she saw it in his hand she fell down before him, crying, 
“Nay, I repent. Thou canst keep thy secret till 
Judgment Day for all of me!” So he hung the mul- 
berry club on the wall, and all his life he kept his 
secret to himself. 

And so much the better, and so much the better 
for us; and so much the worse, and so much the worse 
for them! 

Doom-doom, 0 Drum! Bugle , bugle, tootari! 

Thus says the tale told round about Scutari . 



THE BOY WHO TOOK THE LETTER TO THE 
WORLD WHERE THE DEAD LIVE 





THE BOY WHO TOOK THE LETTER TO THE 
WORLD WHERE THE DEAD LIVE 


a T A DAY AND A YEAR there was- 
What do you suppose ? A poor hunter who died, 
leaving behind him a wife and a boy babe only a 

day old. The mother named the child Gjelosh, and 

67 


68 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

brought him up herself, and always as he grew he 
played alone, because the other boys of the neighbor- 
hood jeered at him for his poverty and shabby 
clothes. ; 

Sometimes when he would come home in tears his 
mother would ask him, “Why dost thou weep, little 
eagle?” He would answer, “The boys shout at me 
because I have no father.” And she would say, 
“Never mind. No father is better than some fathers.” 

One day he asked her, “What was my father?” 
But she would only say, “He was what he was and 
nothing else.” 

So the years went over the tops of the mountains 
till he was fourteen, when he said to her, “I will know 
how my father earned our bread. If thou dost not tell 
me I will go away and thou wilt see me no more.” 
Then said she, “Thy father was a hunter, but it 
brought him no good.” 

“Then I will be a hunter also,” he said, “and we 
shall see what it will bring me. Give me his gun that 
I may use it as he did.” 

When she saw that his mind was set on it, she took 
the gun from a chest in which it was hidden, and gave 
it to him, saying, “Well, then, if hunter thou must 
be! But no luck will come to thee from it.” 

He took the weapon and cleaned it — for it was as 



THE BOY WHO TOOK THE LETTER 69 
rusty as a pair of old fire irons — and made bullets and 
began to practise with it, going hunting every day, 
and before long he had become a better hunter than 
his father had been. 

One day, while he hunted the forest far from home, 
he heard the yelping of wolves, and hastening to the 
spot he found a little horse, gray in color with dun 
markings, caught in a thicket and surrounded by a 
band of wolves that sat on their haunches with their 
jaws slavering and slobbering, waiting till it should 
have exhausted itself with its struggles to leap in 
and devour it. 

When he shot their leader the rest of the wolves 
fled, and he released the horse, saying, “Poor animal! 
Thou hast had a narrow escape!” Then to his amaze- 
ment the little horse spoke in a human voice. 
“Thanks to thee,” it said. “Thou hast given me my 
life.” 

“What!” exclaimed Gjelosh, in astonishment. 
“Canst thou talk man’s speech?” 

“Yes,” the little horse replied. “I have that gift. 
I tell thee because I know thou hast a heart that is 
kind. Only once in a hundred years is a horse foaled 
like me.” 

Asked Gjelosh, “What is thy name, and who is 
thy master?” 



70 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

“My name,” it answered, “is Mingo. I have no 
master, for as soon as my legs were strong enough 
I ran away from the farm where I was born.” 

“Why didst thou do that?” Gjelosh asked. 

“I was afraid,” said the little horse, “that it would 
be discovered what a wonderful horse I was, and then 
I would be kept a prisoner for folk to look at. As for 
me, I love my freedom and cannot bear a halter on 
my neck. I pray thee to be my master. Only love me 
and do not halter me, and I will serve thee all my 
life.” 

When he heard this Gjelosh put his arm about the 
little horse’s neck and kissed it on the nose, and said, 
“My little Mingo, I love thee already, and I am 
proud to be thy master. And if ever thou dost become 
tired of me, thou shalt have thy liberty that mo- 
ment.” 

Then said Mingo, “Promise me thou wilt tell no 
one that I can speak, else I may be taken from thee.” 

Gjelosh promised this, and took the little horse 
home and showed it to his mother. But said she, 
“Of what use is a colt? It is not old enough to carry 
thee.” 

“It will grow,” he answered, and he built it a stall 
beside their dwelling and each morning took it to 
the meadow to roll in the dew and rubbed its coat 



THE BOY WHO TOOK THE LETTER 71 
with dried grass till it shone like copper. When it 
grew strong enough he rode it to the hunt, and the 
little horse was so swift it could outrun a wild hare, 
and every day Gjelosh loved it the more. 

One day, as they hunted wild boars, Gjelosh found 
in the roots of an oak tree two shining stones. He put 
them into his girdle and when he came home he 
thrust them into a chink of the wall beside the door. 

Now that day the King of the country died, and in 
the town the public crier made his rounds, crying, 
“For three nights, in mourning for the King, no 
house shall burn a light after the second hour.” So 
in all the place that night no lamp or candle burned, 
and the Governor had soldiers posted in the streets 
to see that the order was obeyed. 

In the morning, however, report was made that 
while every other house was pitch-dark the dwelling 
of Gjelosh the hunter showed a light, and the 
Governor commanded that he be brought before him. 
Said he, “Didst thou not hear my command? And 
how hast thou dared burn a light in. thy house?” 

Gjelosh replied, “Long life to thee, 0 Governor! 
I am a poor man and cannot afford a candle, but lie 
down and rise up with the sun. There was no light 
burning in my house last night.” The Governor sent 
soldiers who searched the house, but they found no 



72 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

sign of a lamp or a candle in it, and he released him. 

When Gjelosh got home he said to his mother, 
“Some enemy of mine has done this. To-night we 
shall sleep in the field so that no one can accuse us.” So 
at sunset he set her on the back of the little horse and 
led it to the field and they slept there under the stars. 

Now that night also the soldiers saw that the house 
was shining. They entered it and found it empty. 
But seeing that the light came from the wall, they 
examined it and discovered the two bright stones in 
the chink beside the doorway, which in the morning 
they took to the Governor. 

When the Governor saw them he cried out with 
delight, for he had never known their like, and bade 
them bring Gjelosh before him. Said he, “These 
stones were hidden in the wall of thy house, and it is 
they that lighted it at night. Where didst thou get 
them ? ” 

Gjelosh replied, “I found them in the forest.” 

The Governor said to himself, “I will take them 
to the young King and he will give me great reward.” 
And he called for his mounted attendants and riding 
to the capital, presented them at the palace. 

Now the King, who was mourning for his father, 
was charmed with them. Said he, “Where did these 
come from?” 



THE BOY WHO TOOK THE LETTER 73. 

The Governor answered, “A hunter of my town 
found them in the forest, where he hunted wild 
boar.” 

Said the King, “Where they come from there must 
be many. Go and bid him find them and I will build 
of them a palace whose like is not to be seen in the 
white world.” 

The Governor replied, “O Majesty! These are rare 
stones. It will be hard to come upon even one more 
such, let alone enough to build a palace.” 

The King, however, who was a stripling, head- 
strong and without wisdom, frowned angrily. “See 
that they are found!” he cried, “or I will take away 
thy governorship and give it to one who will.” 

So the Governor rode back in an evil temper, 
thinking, “I was a fool to take them to him. More 
must be found now or I shall suffer!” And he sent 
for Gjelosh and said to him, “The King will have 
enough of thy shining stones to build him a palace. 
Go and fetch them or thou art as good as hanged!” 

When he heard this Gjelosh went home in dread 
and told his mother. Said he, “How now shall I save 
my life? For to build a palace will take thousands of 
stones, and if I searched a year I should not find 
three!” 

She answered, “Did I not tell thee thy hunting 



74 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

would bring thee no luck? But mount thy little horse 
Mingo that thou lovest so much and ride to the 
forest. Who knows but God may help thee?” 

He went to the stall and saddled the little horse, 
who sped away with him like the wind to the forest; 
but as he rode despair made him weep, and the tears 
fell on its neck, and it stopped and said, “0 Master, 
why dost thou weep?” At that, Gjelosh told it how 
the matter stood, and said he, “This will be our last 
ride, little comrade, for as I cannot find the stones, 
I shall surely be hanged.” 

“If that is all,” said Mingo, “weep no longer. For 
I can show thee enough of them to build the palace.” 

Cried Gjelosh, “Where are they?” 

The little horse answered, “In the mountains, 
three days’ journey from here, is a hoard of them 
that is guarded by the wild one-eyed donkey Beiram, 
that can be killed by no man.” 

“Alas!” exclaimed Gjelosh. “How then can I get 
them?” 

“Only we horses know Beiram’s secret,” said 
Mingo, “and it is this. His life is in his single eye. 
There is but one thing that can put his eye out, and 
it is the hoof of a horse. I shall do this for thee.” 

“Nay,” cried Gjelosh. “What if he killed thee in- 
stead ? I would not have thee give thy life for mine!” 



THE BOY WHO TOOK THE LETTER 75 

“Never fear,” answered the little horse. “I can 
fight as well as I can run. Take tight hold on my 
mane, for I shall carry thee there in two hours/’ 
And it set off" running so fast that one could not see 
its hoofs. 

In two hours they came to a cleft in the mountains, 
and Mingo stopped. “Beiram’s hoard lies there,” it 
said. “Get down from my back so that I may rest.” 
Gjeiosh dismounted and they lay down till the sun 
was directly overhead, when the little horse rose and 
shook itself. “Now is the time when Beiram each day 
comes and lays bare the hoard to see that it is safe,” 
he said. “Do thou wait here.” And it darted into the 
cleft of the mountains. 

Now scarcely had it vanished when there rose a 
dreadful scream, and the rocks echoed the sounds of 
furious battle. Gjeiosh climbed a tree from whose top 
he beheld the Guardian of the Hoard, which was a 
gigantic donkey, of the color of red blood. Beneath 
the attack of the little horse Beiram brayed like the 
roar of an avalanche, while smoke came from his 
mouth and his one eye shot forth fire. He reared 
again and again, seeking to crush his small enemy, 
but Mingo darted in and out like a hound, biting and 
gouging him with teeth and hoofs till Beiram was 
beside himself with fury. At last the little horse 



76 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

began to gallop about him in a circle, and as it flew 
Beiram turned always about to face it. Till at the 
three hundredth turn he was so dizzy that he fell to 
his knees and Mingo, leaping in, smote his eye with 
its hoof and the fire in it went out and he lay dead. 

Seeing this, Gjelosh hastened down from the tree 
and ran to Mingo. “Glory to thy hoofs!” said he. 
“Yet I was afraid for thee.” 

The little horse showed him the hoard, which held 
ten thousand of the shining stones, and afterward it 
bore him back to the town, where he told his mother 
and they rejoiced together. 

Next morning he went to the Governor and said, 
“Give me five hundred pack horses with their lead- 
ers, together with food for six days, and I will bring 
thee the shining stones.” 

The Governor did so and the stones were brought, 
and he wrapped each one in a red cloth and set out 
with them for the capital. When they were piled 
in the Palace Square they shone so brightly that the 
whole city needed no lights, and the King, rejoicing, 
rewarded the Governor richly and sent for the royal 
architects and builders, who built him a palace more 
splendid than the realm had ever seen, nor was there 
one stone too many or one too few. 

After that Gjelosh lived in content, spending his 



THE BOY WHO TOOK THE LETTER 77 
days hunting in the forest on his little horse Mingo, 
and sleeping soundly at night. One day he shot a 
lynx of great size whose skin was of perfect color and 
texture. He took it home and showed it to his 
mother. 

Said she, “Glory to thy eyes! Thou canst sell it for 
a good price in the market place.” 

But he answered, “I shall not sell it. I shall hang 
it over the door of our house, so that folk can admire 
it and all may know that I am a good hunter.” 

“Remember the shining stones!” she said. “They 
brought thee only trouble. Do not display the skin 
lest more come to thee.” But he hung it over the door 
in pride, and everyone who passed exclaimed at its 
beauty, and his fame as a hunter went wide. 

Now it happened that the Governor passed that 
way and saw it, and sending for Gjelosh, said to him, 
“Bring me thy lynx skin that I may give it to the 
King to say his prayers on, and here is a gold ducat 
for it.” 

He replied, “Gladly!” and brought it to him, re- 
joicing, since the gold was more than he could have 
got for it in the market. 

When the King saw the skin, he said to the 
Governor, “Where didst thou get this? For it is 
finer than any I have seen.” 



78 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

Answered the Governor, ‘T bought it from the 
same hunter who found the bright stones for thy 
palace.” 

Said the King, “He is a remarkable hunter, indeed! 
Where this came from there must be others. Bid him 
bring me, within twenty days, a hundred more, that 
I may carpet the floors of my new palace with them.” 

“0 Majesty!” exclaimed the Governor. “Skins 
like this must be most rare. I doubt if there be a 
hundred to be found in all the land.” 

But the King scowled at him, and said, “Do as I 
bid thee! I will have them, or thou shalt lose thy 
head!” 

So the Governor departed, saying to himself, 
“What evil spirit prompted me to give it to him!” 
And he returned to his town and sent for Gjelosh, 
and said to him, “The King will have a hundred 
lynx skins like the one I had from thee. I give thee 
twenty days to find them. And if thou dost not, thy 
hands and feet shall be struck off and thou shalt be 
beaten to death.” 

When he heard this, Gjelosh went home in fear and 
foreboding. And his mother said, “What did I tell 
thee? Wilt thou never learn? But take thy little 
horse and ride in the forest. Maybe God will show 
thee what to do.” 



THE BOY WHO TOOK THE LETTER 79 

He mounted Mingo and rode to the forest, but as 
he rode his tears fell on the little horse’s mane, and 
Mingo stopped and asked him, “0 Master, why dost 
thou weep?” Gjelosh told it his trouble, and said he, 
“In all my hunting I have killed but one lynx, and 
in my whole lifetime I could not kill a hundred. 
Our days of sport together are ended, for in twenty 
days I shall be dead.” 

“If that is all,” said the little horse, “thou needst 
not grieve. I know a secret pool in the high mountains 
where the lynxes come by night to drink.” 

Gjelosh replied, “The lynx is the most cunning of 
animals, and its scent is the keenest. By lying in wait 
I might kill a few, but never enough.” 

“There is one who can advise us,” said the little 
horse. “It is a Thopch I know. I can take thee to 
him, and he will aid thee for my sake, for we horses 
are friends to the dwarfs.” 

“But the Thopchs live in the Underworld,” said 
Gjelosh. “Hoy? can we g° there?” 

“No need to do that,” Mingo replied. “On every 
full moon he comes forth between the Moving 
Mountains that open and shut every day at noon, 
to spend a sun-round basking in the sun. To-night is 
full moon and we shall find him there. Only give me 
leave and I will take thee to him in three hours.” 



80 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

Gjelosh bade it do so, and it set out, running faster 
than a boulder rolls down a cliff, and three hours 
later it brought him to where the two high mountains 
stood leaning one against the other. There they 
waited till noon, when the sun was directly overhead, 
when it thundered bumbullim, and the mountains 
opened, and out of the gap came skipping the 
Thopch, who was only as tall as Gjelosh ’s knee, with 
a white beard so long that he wore it wrapped about 
his body instead of a coat, and ears so big that he 
pinned them together over his head for a turban. 

The little horse greeted him, saying, “O Thopch, 
I have brought hither my master who asks thy coun- 
sel. I pray thee aid him for my sake.” 

Said the Thopch, “The Horse Folk were always 
friends to us dwarfs, and I will do so.” 

Then Gjelosh told him his case, and the Thopch, 
after he had pondered for an hour with his eyes 
closed, said, “There is only one way in which thou 
canst kill the lynxes. Demand of the Governor 
twenty mule-loads of wine three years old. Take 
them to the pool where the creatures drink, and pour 
the wine into it and lie in wait for them. They will 
drink the wine and become drunk, when thou canst 
kill them all.” 

Gjelosh thanked the dwarf, and the little horse 



the boy who took the letter 8i 
bore him bach to the town, where he went before the 
Governor and demanded the mulea and the win. 




82 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

the secret pool in the forest. Into this he poured the 
wine and tethering the mules at a distance, hid him- 
self with his gun in the bushes that fringed the pool. 
And in the night the lynxes came in droves to drink, 
and the wine made them drunk so that they could 
not escape, and he killed of them a hundred in less 
time than a tale-teller could tell of it. 

In the morning he rode back to the town and said 
to the Governor, “Give me twenty butchers, and 
they shall bring thee the lynx skins for the King’s 
palace.” 

The Governor, rejoicing, gave him the twenty 
butchers and Gjelosh led them to the pool, where they 
fell to skinning the animals and loading the skins onto 
the mules, and when he returned with them the 
Governor had them tanned and sewed and journeyed 
with them himself to the King, giving Gjelosh only 
another gold ducat for his trouble. As for the King, 
he found the skins just sufficient to cover the floors of 
his new palace of shining stones — there was not one 
too many nor one too few. He rewarded the governor 
richly and the palace became even more famous than 
before and folk came from further and further away 
to see it. 

Now for his feat of killing the hundred lynxes 
Gjelosh had become the most famous citizen of the 



THE BOY WHO TOOK THE LETTER 83 
town and the most celebrated hunter in all the Land- 
of-the-Eagle. People talked of him more than they 
talked even of the Governor, so that in time the 
Governor was overcome with jealousy. Said he to 
himself, “I am sick of hearing of this huntsman, this 
son of nobody. If I had not sent him for the bright 
stones and made him find the lynxes, he would be 
next door to a beggar still. Yet I receive no credit for 
it, while his name is in every man’s mouth. I will see 
that he is sent where he will give me no more 
trouble!” 

So he went to the King and said he, “O Majesty! 
Thou art surely the greatest monarch the world has 
known! Thou hast built a palace of shining stones 
more beautiful than the eye of man has ever seen, 
and hast furnished it with skins rarer and more 
costly than any brocade. Alas, that the late King, thy 
royal father, does not know of thy grandeur!” 

The young King replied, “That is a sad thought to 
me. Would, indeed, that he might know of my ex- 
ploits!” 

Asked the Governor, “Why shouldst thou not send 
a letter to him to acquaint him of thy condition, that 
he may rejoice with thee?” 

Now the King was an ignorant and credulous 
youth, whom fair words could deceive, and when the 



84 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

Governor spoke thus he cried out in astonishment, 
“What! Is it possible, then, for a living man to go to 
the World Where the Dead Live?” 

“Why not?” answered the wily Governor. 
“Though it would no doubt take a very clever man 
to do so, and thou shouldst choose the cleverest in all 
the realm to take thy letter and bring back thy 
father’s answer.” 

“Why,” said the Kong, “thou art the one, I sup- 
pose. Thou aft certainly cleverer than my Prime 
Minister, for it was thou who brought me the shining 
stones and the lynx skins, and he has never brought 
me anything but the taxes.” 

The Governor replied, “It is true, O Majesty, that 
I am cleverer than thy Prime Minister, and to say so 
is not to boast unduly. But though I brought thee the 
stones and the skins, it was not I who found him, but 
the hunter. In my opinion he is cleverer than I my- 
self.” 

“To be sure!” said the King. “I did not think of 
that. He shall go.” And he bade the Governor write 
the letter at once to his dead father, recounting his 
greatness and telling of the wonder of his new palace, 
and ordered that Gjelosh, the hunter, be summoned. 

When the order reached him Gjelosh mounted his 
little horse Mingo and rode to the capital in high 



THE BOY WHO TOOK THE LETTER 85 
spirits, thinking to himself, “The King means to re- 
ward me for what I have done. No doubt he will give 
me much gold, so that I can build me a fine house and 
eat meat every day!” When he heard what was ex- 
pected of him, however, his joy turned to fear. “O 
King’s Majesty!” he exclaimed, “a man, dying, may 
indeed go to the World Where the Dead Live, but 
how may a living man go there?” 

At this the King flew into a passion. Cried he, “Ask 
of me what thou wilt for the journey, but thou shalt 
certainly go! And if thou comest back without the 
answer from my father, thou shalt be buried in the 
ground to thy neck till thou diest, and the crows shall 
peck out thy eyeballs!” 

When he heard these words Gjelosh went out in 
great trouble and rode home to tell his mother. Said 
she, “O my sons this is what thy hunting has brought 
thee to! But ride on thy little horse to the forest and 
say a prayer. to God. For He helped thee twice and 
there is luck in threes.” 

So he mounted Mingo and rode to the forest. And 
again he wept and the tears fell on the little horse’s 
mane and it stopped, saying, “Master, why weepest 
thou?” 

Gjelosh told his story then, saying^ “That scoun- 
drel of a governor has done this. He desires my death. 



86 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

and we shall hunt no more together. For even the 

Thopch could not tell us how to escape from this 

trap.” 

“Nevertheless,” said Mingo, “let us ask him, for 
the dwarf is very wise. To-night is full moon again, 
when he comes through the Moving Mountains. Let 
us go at once.” 

Said Gjelosh, “Very well, we can only fail.” And 
the little horse set out, running faster than a hawk 
swoops, and in three hours they came to the two tall 
mountains. They waited till noon, when the thunder 
roared bumbullim and the mountains split apart, and 
out came the Thopch. 

When they had greeted him Gjelosh told him his 
case, and the dwarf shut his eyes and pondered an 
hour, when he opened them and said, “There is only 
one I know of who is wise enough to aid thee. That is 
a Beautiful-of-the-Earth who lives in a mountain a 
sun-round from here, which is the home of a Dif who 
keeps her his prisoner.” 

Now the Difs are giants, as tall as pine trees, with 
black beards that fall to their knees. They are filthy 
as wild boars and are covered with lice as big as grass- 
hoppers. They live in the Underworld, or on the tops 
of mountains, eating man’s flesh, and when one 
comes upon a woman alone on the trail, he steals her 



THE BOY WHO TOOK THE LETTER 87 
away and keeps her to fan the flies from him while he 
sleeps. A mountain known to be the haunt of a Dif is 
shunned by everyone, and when the Thopch said this, 
Gjelosh’s heart sank. 

But said the little horse, “O Thopch, my master 
and I thank thee. But tell us how to find the moun- 
tain of the Dif.” 

Said the dwarf, “It is west of here, and stands 
alone, with its feet in a swamp and its head in the 
clouds. But go not on the mountain except between 
noon and sunset. For at that time the Dif is away 
hunting men to eat. And think not to find the 
Beautiful-of-the-Earth in her proper form. For when 
he leaves her, he turns her into something else, such as 
a rock or a stump of wood, or a cast-off snake skin.” 

Cried Gjelosh at this, “Alas! There must be thou- 
sands of such things on every mountain! It will be 
impossible to find her, and even if we did so, how can 
a rock or a stump speak to us ?” 

Then the Thopch closed his eyes and thought an- 
other hour, till at last he opened them and said, “The 
Dif must each time turn her into something he has 
not used before. Since he has held her captive these 
many years, he will have used up all the common 
things and must by now be compelled to think of 
things that do not belong to mountains. Look, there- 



88 ALBANIAN WONDER. TALES 

fore, for something that should belong elsewhere. If 
thou findest such an object thou hast only to touch 
it, and it will straightway become the Beautiful-of- 
the-Earth. She may be able to help thee. That is all 
I can tell thee.” 

So Gjelosh thanked him and rode away to the west- 
ward, Mingo running its best, till they came, at sun- 
set, to the edge of a great swamp, in the middle of 
which reared a single mountain, with its feet in the 
marsh and its head in the clouds. 

They rested there that night and till noon next day, 
when they climbed the mountain and the little horse 
began galloping hither and thither. All the afternoon 
they searched vainly, till near nightfall Gjelosh said, 
"I see something strange hanging in that tree yon- 
der.” Mingo galloped to it, and lo, it was a quarter of 
meat. 

Said Gjelosh, “Who can have brought this meat 
and left it hanging here?” 

“Why,” said the little horse, “what can it be but 
the Beautiful-of-the-Earth? Climb the tree and touch 
it with thy hand.” 

So Gjelosh dismounted and climbed the tree and 
put his hand to the meat, and instantly it turned into 
a woman so beautiful that she could not be de- 
scribed. 



THE BOY WHO TOOK THE LETTER 89 

“Thank God!” she exclaimed. “Thou art not the 
Dif ! Art thou a man ?” 

He answered, “Yes.” 

Said she, “I have been here many years and thou 
art the first man I have seen! I pray thee, whoever 
thou art, take me away with thee before the Dif 
comes, and I will be either thy slave or thy wife as 
long as I live. But hasten, for the sun is about to set 
when the Dif returns, and if he finds thee here he will 
eat thee.” 

“I know not if I shall live long enough to marry 
thee,” said Gjelosh, “but at any rate the Dif shall 
have thee no longer.” And he took her down from the 
tree and wrapped her in his cloak and set her before 
him on the saddle. As he did so there came a cold 
wind through the trees and a great roaring at which 
the ground trembled, and she cried out, “Hasten, for 
he is coming!” 

Gjelosh cried to the little horse, “Run thy best, 
little comrade!” and Mingo set off swifter than a wild 
goose flies, down the mountain and across the swamp, 
faster and faster, through the dusk and moonlight 
till the dawn. As they rode he told the Beautiful-of- 
the-Earth his trouble, and said she, “Thou hast 
rescued me from the Dif, and never fear but in return 
I shall save thee.” 



90 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

So they came to his house, where he showed her to 
his mother, saying, “This is the wife whom I shall 
marry.” 

The old woman was astonished at her beauty. But 
said she, “0 my son, canst thou think of marrying a 
wife when such danger is after thee ?” 

The Beautiful-of-the-Earth, however, laughed, 
saying, “Nay, fear not, for no harm shall come to 
him.” 

So all lay down and slept till they woke refreshed, 
and after they had eaten and drunk, she said to 
Gjelosh, “Go to the King and tell him thou art ready 
for thy journey to the World Where the Dead Live. 
But bid him first send criers throughout the realm 
announcing that whoever desires to send a letter by 
thy hand may write it and that thou wilt carry it. 
Meanwhile, thy mother shall hide me in an inner 
room and do thou say naught of me to anyone.” 

Gjelosh rode to the capital accordingly, and the 
King sent criers who cried in all the towns, “Ho, ye! 
A royal messenger is departing to the World Where 
the Dead Live. All who would send letters thither 
have leave to write them.” So that the criers brought 
back a hundred letters. 

Now when it became known that Gjelosh the 
Hunter was to be the messenger to go to the World 



THE BOY WHO TOOK THE LETTER 91 
Where the Dead Live, the townsfolk said to one 
another, “Never have we heard of such a thing! Our 
Gjelosh must be a wise man to have learned the way, 
and he is a valiant one to dare it!” And they crowded 
the street before his house day and night, shouting his 
name, so that the Governor, hearing, was more filled 
with malice and spite than ever. 

As for the King, when the last crier had returned, 
he sealed all the letters they had brought in a sack, 
together with his own letter to his dead father, and 
gave it to the Governor, bidding him send the hunter 
upon his journey. And the Governor, rejoicing that 
he was now to see the last of the man he hated, 
hastened to the town where Gjelosh waited and sum- 
moning him, gave him the sack of letters, saying, 
“Begone on thy errand, fool, and a good riddance to 
thee!” 

So Gjelosh returned to his house, a great crowd at 
his heels, and going in to the inner room where the 
Beautiful-of-the-Earth was hidden, said he, “The 
time has come for me to start. What am I to do?” 

She answered, “Ride to the eastward till midnight, 
then return here by a roundabout way, and be sure no 
one sees thee on thy way back.” 

So he went out, and saddling the little horse, put 
the sack of letters in his saddlebag, and Mingo darted 



92 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

away over the mountains to the eastward with all the 

people shouting their farewells after them. 

He rode till midnight, when he turned about and 
bade the little horse take him back by another road, 
and thus while all in the town slept he came back, 
with Mingo treading as softly as a cat, and the 
Beautiful-of-the-Earth put him in one inner room 
and the little horse in another. There she kept them 
secretly, giving Gjelosh only a single fig and Mingo 
only one handful of oats each day. Meanwhile she 
read all the letters in the sack and wrote an answer to 
each and every one. The answer she wrote for the 
dead King said : 

“O my son! I have read thy letter with gladness and 
rejoice in thy power and greatness which is so well worthy 
of my line. This is to tell thee that I rule here in this world 
as I ruled in thine. Only one thing I miss — that is the aid 
and wisdom of my Governor, by whose advice thou hast 
sent me thy so-welcome letter. And I pray thee to send 
him to me without delay, and to put in his place the 
messenger who has Brought me thy letter. This is the 
word of thy beloved father.” 

When the letters were finished — and by then both 
Gjelosh and the little horse were as thin as starved 
hens and Gjelosh’s face had no more blood in it than 
a squash — she sealed them in the sack and burned the 



THE BOY WHO TOOK THE LETTER 93 
ones to which they were answers. Then, late one 
night, she saddled Mingo, and put Gjelosh on his 
back, with the sack in his saddlebag, and said she, 
“Ride softly till thou art out of the town, then take 
the first road to the capital, and give the letters to the 
King.” 

This he did, so that at dawn the soldiers before the 
palace of shining stones saw approaching them a man 
who was nothing but skin and bone, mounted on a 
little horse whose legs were like pipe-stems, so weak 
that it swayed from side to side. Said Gjelosh, “Tell 
the King that I, Gjelosh the Hunter, have returned 
from the World Where the Dead Live, with a letter 
for him from his royal father.” 

When they heard this they cried out in amazement, 
and lifted him from the saddle and carried him into 
the palace and gave him food and wine, and the little 
horse they tended in the royal stable. As for the 
King, when he heard the news he did not even wait 
to take off his nightcap, and when he read the letter 
from his dead father he wept with joy. 

He ordered bells to be rung and flags to be hoisted 
and sent for the Governor, who, when he heard the 
hunter had returned, was so filled with rage that he 
came before the King as pale as ashes. 

“0 King's Majesty!” cried he. “This man is an 



94 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

impostor. He has no more been to the World Where 
the Dead Live than have I ! None can go there but the 
dead themselves.” 

“What!” said the King. “Didst thou not thyself 
bid me send him? And did not thine own hand write 
my letter to my father to which he hath brought me 
an answer?” 

“That answer he must have written himself!” 
cried the Governor. 

Then Gjelosh spoke. “Alas!” he said, “I am only a 
poor hunter, without education, and I have never 
learned to write!” 

“He is a liar!” shouted the Governor. 

At that the young King’s eyes turned red with 
anger. “If thou didst bid me send him where no living 
man can go, by thine own speech thou didst think to 
make mock of me!” said he. “And if thou doubtest 
the journey can be made, thou shalt prove it to thy- 
self. My father asks for thee. Get thee gone, therefore, 
and delay not an hour lest I forget his request and 
hang thee in the public Square!” 

So the Governor went from the palace tottering on 
his feet, and fled the country and nobody has ever 
found him. And Gjelosh was made Governor in his 
place, and he took the wise Beautiful-of-the-Earth to 
wife and they lived happily ever after. 



THE BOY WHO TOOK THE LETTER 95 
And as for the little horse Mingo, he rode him every 
day in the forest, and talked with him in secret, and 
they were the best of comrades all their lives long. 

This story was told me by a 'jijapajumas one eve- 
ning in the afternoon on the long short road that goes 
over and under the hill. Health to us all! 




THE BOY WHO WAS FATED TO BE A KING 





THE BOY WHO WAS FATED TO BE A KING 

W HETHER YOU BELIEVE IT or doubt it, 
no matter. May all good things come to you 
who listen! 

Once and once there was a king of the country be- 
yond where the snow lies heavy on the necks of the 
mountains who left his affairs in the hands of his 
Prime Minister and set out afoot as a wayfarer to see 
how folk fared in other lands. 


99 


IOO ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

He went as far as he went, till he came to the 
southern land of the Toshk, where one night the dark 
overtook him with a rain like whips and the ium- 
bullim of thunder. He saw a house near the road and 
knocking at its door, said to the woman who opened 
it, “Blessings on this dwelling! I am a stranger who 
asks shelter for the night.” 

She replied, “Enter. The evening bread is ready 
and thou art welcome.” So he went in and sat down 
before the fire and she gave him to drink a cup of wine 
steeped from grape skins, and after that a meal of 
goat’s milk, commeal, cheese, and wild honey. 

Now a table stood in the corner of the room, and 
presently the woman opened a chest and taking from 
it a cloth embroidered with gold, spread it on the 
table and set thereon a silver pitcher, with three 
dishes of stewed lamb and three wedges of bread, and 
by each dish she set knife and spoon. 

He wondered at this, and said, “If thou dost enter- 
tain company to-night, I fear my presence is unwel- 
come and I will wend my way.” 

She replied, “Not so. Although my husband is not 
here, the door of this house is open to thee. In the 
cradle yonder lies a boy babe born to me three days 
ago, and to-night being the third night the Mira will 


come. 



THE BOY WHO WAS FATED TO BE A KING IOI 

Asked he, “What are the Mira?” 

She answered, “They are female spirits, very tall, 
with faces as white as chalk and long black hair. In 
these mountains they come whenever a boy babe is 
bom, to give him his fate.” 

Said he, “I am not of this land. What if they be 
displeased at my presence?” 

She answered, “No doubt it is by their plan that 
thou art here.” 

Then she filled the silver pitcher with honey and 
threw into it three almonds and set the door ajar, 
after which she seated herself beside him, saying, “It 
is the time. Speak no word while they are here else 
misfortune will follow thy trail for twice nine years.” 

So he sat silent, and presently the door flew open 
without a knock and in came the three Mira. They 
were taller than human women, with faces white and 
terrible, and each wore a single black robe without a 
girdle. They said no word, but sat down at the table 
and ate the food and drank the honey. 

When they had eaten and drunk the eldest took the 
babe from the cradle and stripped it naked, and hold- 
ing it up, made a sign with her finger on its forehead. 
Said she, “Time will go and time will go, and again 
there will come hither this man who sits by the fire.” 
The second then came and took the babe from her 



102 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

and wrote on its breast with her finger, and said, 
“Time will go and time will go, and this babe will 
journey to this man who sits by the fire.” Lastly, the 
third came and took the child and wrote with her 
finger on its back, saying, “Time will go and time will 
go, and this babe will stand in the place of this man 
who sits by the fire.” 

Then the eldest swaddled the babe again and laid 
it in the cradle and all three went through the open 
door and vanished. 

The woman spoke no word to the King, but when 
she had washed the dishes and put the silver pitcher 
and the gold-embroidered cloth again in the chest, she 
lay down in the corner and went to sleep. 

The King lay half the night wondering at what he 
had seen. Thought he, “These Mira are spirits and 
what they will must be!” And in the morning, as he 
ate the breakfast of parched corn the woman set be- 
fore him, he took a ring from his finger and gave it to 
her, saying, “Since it is decreed by fate that thy babe 
is one day to stand in my place, he must be as my son. 
In my land, which is beyond where the snow lies 
heavy on the necks of the mountains, I am a person 
of consequence, and my name is engraved on this 
ring. When he has come to man’s stature, give it to 
him and let him come to me.” 



THE BOY WHO WAS FATED TO BE A KING IOJ 

So he bade her farewell and departed. He went as 
far as he went, visiting ten southern countries, and it 
was two harvests before he turned again northward. 
Then, treading in his own footsteps, he came once 
more to the house where he had seen the Mira, and 
there was a little boy two years old playing by its 
door. Said he to himself, “That is no doubt the babe I 
saw. While I have no son of mine own, yet he who is 
to stand in my place should be of noble blood, and 
this child is the son of a peasant with ten sheep and 
a donkey!” And he repented of what he had told the 
mother. 

He knocked at the door and making himself known 
to the woman, said to her, “As was decreed by the 
Mira, I have come again to this place. Since I am now 
returning to mine own land, I pray thee give me the 
child now, instead of waiting till he be grown, that I 
may take him with me.” 

The woman went to the field to fetch her husband, 
and after they had consulted together, they gave the 
King the child, and he set it on his shoulder and took 
the trail. But no sooner had he come to the other side 
of the mountains than he lowered it into a deep ravine 
and abandoned it there and continued his journey. 

Now there was a shepherd who browsed his goats 
on the mountainside, and that evening when he 



104 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

brought them to the fold to milk them his best goat 
was dry. So he fell to watching it, and following it one 
day he found it suckling the little boy in the ravine. 



Counting the child a gift from God, he brought him 
home to his wife and they named him Visojidha and 
reared him as their own, keeping carefully the ring 
which he had worn on a cord about his neck under his 
shirt. Thus he lived till he was eighteen, tree-straight 
and tall, and the handsomest lad in seven villages, 
who sooner than break his word to any man would 
have drowned himself. 


THE BOY WHO WAS FATED TO BE A KING 105 

At that time the shepherd gave the ring to him and 
told him his history. Said he, “It is not good for thee 
to live always in our poor fashion. This ring has a 
name engraved upon it. Go and seek out its owner 
and perhaps thou mayest find thy rightful place in 
the white world.” And he took from a hiding place in 
the wall three silver pieces that he had laid by, and 
gave them to him, saying, “This will provide for thy 
wants while thou art journeying.” 

“But what wilt thou do without me?” exclaimed 
Visojidha. 

“There are only the sheep,” the shepherd an- . 
swered, “and my son Ndrek and I will care for them.” 

Now Ndrek was an idle lad, who had always hated 
Visojidha for his good looks and good nature, and 
Visojidha feared that without him his foster parents 
would suffer, but the shepherd insisted that he go to 
find his luck, so on a day he bade them both farewell, 
weeping, and took to the trail. He went two days, he 
went three days, and on the fourth, as he climbed the 
mountain, Ndrek overtook him. 

“What dost thou here?” cried Visojidha. 

“I go with thee,” Ndrek replied. “I am tired of 
shepherding and am of a mind to share thy fortune.” 

“But,” said Visojidha, “what of thy father and 
mother?” . 



106 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

“They can shift for themselves,” answered Ndrek. 
“I have had enough of them.” 

So, though Visojidha had no wish for his company, 
they fared on together. As often as they came to a 
new country Visojidha would seek out a town and 
exhibit his ring and inquire whether it was the work- 
manship of that land. Till they came at length to the 
land beyond where the snow lies heavy on the necks 
of the mountains, where a goldsmith to whom he 
showed it said, “This ring I know, for I myself made 
it many years ago.” 

Asked Visojidha, “Whose is the name engraved on 
it?” 

The man replied, “There is but one man in this 
country who bears that name, and that is our King.” 

Visojidha asked him, “Where is he to be found?” 

The goldsmith answered, “In the capital, which is 
three days’ journey from here.” 

So they set out, and on the third day they came in 
sight of the city, which was built on the edge of a 
great plain. There they sat down on the high bank of 
a stream to eat bread, and Ndrek said, “Do thou go 
down and fetch some water for us to drink.” 

Visojidha did so, but as he turned to climb up the 
bank, lo, Ndrek stood above him with a great boulder 
lifted in his hands, and said he, “He that is bom a cat 



THE BOY WHO WAS FATED TO BE A KING 107 
must catch the mouse. Give me thy ring, and swear to 
what I bid thee, or this stone shall split thy skull!” 

Asked Visojidha, “To what must I swear?” 

Ndrek replied, “From this time on it is I who am 
the bearer of the ring, and thou art my servant. A 
cow is tied by the horns, and a man by his word. 
Swear that to the day of thy death thou wilt not be- 
tray me.” 

Then said Visojidha, “Since to save my life it must 
be, I so swear.” And he gave Ndrek the ring and they 
went on to the capital. 

Now the royal palace stood on a hill in the heart of 
the city and Ndrek went to its gate and demanded of 
the soldiers who guarded it that they be taken to the 
King. When they came before him, he showed him the 
ring, saying, “O King’s Majesty! When I was a babe 
I was found in a ravine in a southern land with this 
ring on a cord about my neck. Since it bean thy 
name, I have made bold to bring it to thee.” 

When he saw the ring, the King was stricken with 
remorse. He thought, “I have been guilty before God 
of the death of that innocent babe! But no one can 
escape his fate and Heaven intends this lad to be my 
son!” And he embraced him and gave him quarters 
in the palace and Ndrek went dressed in silks and 
brocade with a silver chain over his shoulder and had 



108 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

a mettled horse to ride and ate costly food, while Viso- 
jidha as his servant fetched and carried for him and 
ate crusts. 

But always Ndrek feared lest Visojidha forget his 
oath and betray him, and at last he bethought himself 
of a plan. He took to his bed, and refused to eat and 
drink, pretending sickness, till the King’s doctors 
shook their gray heads over him and the King was 
greatly troubled. At length he said to the King, “I am 
very sick. Only one thing will cure me, and that is the 
juice of a cabbage.” 

The King answered, “Alas! There is but one place 
in this land where cabbages grow and that is in the 
forest of the Lubiya, and no man can get them from 
her!” 

Now the Lubiya of that country was a creature 
most fierce and dreadful, of woman’s shape, tall as a 
fir tree, with a face as gray as a rock and a body cov- 
ered with red wool. The forest which she roamed was 
dense and dark, and her lair, round which grew the 
cabbages, was halfway to its center, and was knee- 
deep with the white bones of heroes who had tried to 
rid the place of her and whom she had devoured as a. 
cat eats locusts. This Ndrek well knew, and said he, 
“My servant Visojidha has always loved me, and is 
very clever. If any man can get the cabbage for me, it 



THE BOY WHO WAS FATED TO BE A KING 109 
is he. But bid him not return without it, or I shall 
die.” 

So the King, out of his great wish to save Ndrek’s 
life, summoned Visojidha and said to him, “Go to- 
morrow to the forest of the Lubiya and bring one of 
her cabbages, or I shall have thee hanged.” 

When he heard this Visojidha went from the King’s 
presence weeping, and lay down on his pallet in 
despair, for he had no thought but that he would 
leave his bones in that place. But after a while he 
slept, and he dreamed that three tall women, with 
faces as white as chalk and long black hair, stood 
about him. And said the eldest, “0 my sisters, this is 
the babe who has come, according to our word, to 
stand in the place of the man who sat by the fire in 
the southern land of the Toshk. Let us instruct him 
how to gain the Lubiya’s cabbage.” The others an- 
swered, “Good.” Said she then to him, “Thou wilt 
find the Lubiya devouring a dead horse, but a dagger 
bird and a bluebottle fly contend with her for it.” 
And the second said to him, “Do thou offer to divide 
the carcass between the three so that all shall be satis- 
fied.” And said the third, “Give the blood to the fly, 
the entrails to the bird, and the flesh and bones to the 
Lubiya, but on condition that she give thee one of her 
cabbages and serve thee the next service thou shalt 



IIO ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

ask of her.” And having thus spoken, all three faded 

away. 

In the morning Visojidha went to the King and 
said he, “0 King's Majesty, give me a steed to ride 
and a sharp sword.” The King bade that these be 
given him, and he mounted and rode to the forest. 
He rode five hours, he rode ten hours, till at last he 
reached it, and from its depths there arose such a 
dreadful howling and screeching that he could scarce 
hear himself think. 

He drew his sword and spurred his brave steed 
straight forward, till, halfway to its center, under the 
dark trees, he beheld the Lubiya, crouched like a great 
lynx atop the carcass of a dead nag, while a dagger 
bird and a bluebottle fly were darting about her head, 
on which the hair stood up like a porcupine’s quills. 
As often as she bent to set her teeth in the meat, the 
bird would drive his dagger bill into her haunch and 
the fly would stab at her eyes, so that she howled in 
fury and the yellow foam dripped from her jaws. 

When she saw Visojidha she spat at him, and yelled 
she, “Man, what dost thou here? When I have eaten 
this horse I shall crunch thy bones!” 

But he said, “Nay, I am come to do thee a favor. 
Let me divide the dead horse between you three, and 
ye shall all be satisfied.” 



THE BOY WHO WAS FATED TO BE A KING III 

Said she, “What wilt thou ask for it?” 

He replied, “Thou shalt give me one of thy cab- 
bages, and do for me the next service I shall ask of 
thee.” 

“Well and good,” said she, “but make haste, for I 
am very hungry.” 

He asked the bird and the fly, “Are ye content?” 
And when they squawked and buzzed agreement, he 
dismounted and fell to with his sword and hewed 
the carcass into fifty pieces. Said he, “O Bird, to thee 
the entrails. 0 Fly, to thee the blood. And thou, O 
Lubiya, shalt have the flesh and bones.” At that the 
dagger bird and the bluebottle fly fell upon the feast 
with satisfaction, and the Lubiya said, “O Man, I 
will keep my promise to thee. Take thy cabbage and 
go, and yet one more service will I serve thee when 
thou askest it.” And she began to gorge upon the 
meat and bones. 

So he cut one of the cabbages and remounted and 
rode back to the capital rejoicing. He went to the 
King and said, “0 King’s Majesty, mayest thou be 
in health! Here is thy cabbage.” 

The King was delighted and ordered a broth made 
of it and took it to the lad Ndrek and made him drink 
it, and Ndrek hid his anger and pretended that it had 
cured his sickness. 



112 


ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 


But in his heart Ndrek pondered how he might 
bring about Visojidha’s destruction. Accordingly, 
soon after, he lay down again on his bed and would 
not eat, and to the King he said, “Alas! Sickness has 
seized me once more, and this time I fear there is no 
cure for me. For I have fallen in love with the 
Beautiful-of-the-Earth, and unless I gain her for my 
wife I shall die, indeed.” 

Now this Beautiful-of-the-Earth was more lovely 
than any human woman in the land. She lived in a 
castle in the very center of the forest of the Lubiya 
and was guarded by enchantments so powerful that a 
hundred princes, sons of Kings, though they had out- 
witted the Lubiya and had won to her castle, had lost 
their lives trying to gain her. So the King said, “Have 
not a hundred brave youths tried in vain to gain her! 
There is no man in my realm clever and strong 
enough.” 

•Said Ndrek, “Send my servant Visojidha. Did he 
not bring the cabbage ? If any man can win her for me, 
it will be he.” 


Accordingly the King summoned Visojidha a sec- 
ond time and safcVhe, “To-morrow go again to the 
Lubiya’s foresl^a bring the Beautiful-of-the-Earth 
who lives there. And if thou fail, thou shalt be beaten 


to death with oaken rods!” 



THE BOY WHO WAS FATED TO BE A KING 113 

When Visojidha heard this he went from him sor- 
rowful and lay down on his pallet, thinking, “As the 
saying is, ‘The tree gives the ax a handle and the ax 
cuts down the tree!’ Ndrek, who owes his good for- 
tune to me, desires my death, and I shall not return 
alive!” And he went to sleep weeping salt tears. 

But as he slept he dreamed the three tall women 
again stood about him, and the eldest said to him, 
“To-morrow ask the King for a thousand lambs, four 
rams, a hundred donkeys laden with wheat and a 
hundred with honey, and take them to the forest.” 
Said the second, “There demand of the Lubiya, as the 
second service she promised thee, that she tell thee 
how to gain the Beautiful-of-the-Earth.” And said 
the third, “When thou hast gained her, give to the 
Lubiya one by one the two hundred donkeys for her 
to devour and thou wilt be able to pass her on thy 
return.” When they had thus spoken, they vanished. 

The dream comforted Visojidha, and in the morn- 
ing when he woke he went to the King and asked for 
the lambs, the rams, the donkeys, the wheat, and the 
honey. These the King gave him, and he put his 
sword in his girdle, mounted his ho* ;, and set out for 
the forest, leading the train of la*. ;n donkeys and 
driving the rams and lambs before him. 

However long the way, at length he arrived there. 



1 14 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

and the Lubiya, when she saw the train approaching, 
reared up like a tree, belching fire from her mouth 
and yelling with delight. “0 Man!” she screeched, 
“hasten, that I may quickly devour thee and set my 
teeth in thy animals!” 

But said he, “Nay, I am that man whom thou didst 
promise to serve a second service, and I am come to 
demand it.” 

Said she, angrily, “Well, since I gave thee that 
word, what dost thou desire?” 

He replied, “I would gain the Beautiful-of-the- 
Earth, whose home is in this forest. Tell me how I 
may do so.” 

Asked the Lubiya, “What do thy donkeys carry?” 

He answered, “Wheat and honey,” 

Then said she, “Listen well to what I tell thee. 
When thou comest to her castle thou wilt see a thou- 
sand eagles soaring about it. Give to each eagle one 
of thy sheep. While they are feeding upon them, go 
forward to its outer gate, which is guarded by two 
lions, and give to each lion one of thy rams. While 
they are eating the rams they will let thee pass to the 
inner gate which is guarded likewise by two lions. 
Give to them thy two remaining rams and they also 
will let thee by. In the courtyard thou wilt see many 
ants and bees. Scatter thy wheat and pour out thy 



THE BOY WHO WAS FATED TO BE A KING 115 
honey there on the ground for them. With the help 
of her birds, her beasts, and her insects, thou mayest 
be able to bring away the Beautiful-of-the-Earth. 
But when thou enterest her castle, fail not to sweep 
the door and the walls, else they will do thee a mis- 
chief, for they are no less her servants than the rest. 
Now get thee gone upon thine errand, else I may for- 
get my promise and devour thee straightway!” And 
she gritted her teeth with rage and hunger, while 
Visojidha hastened on farther into the forest, leading 
his train of donkeys and driving his rams and lambs 
before him. 

So at length, in its very center, he came to the 
castle of the Beautiful-of-the-Earth, built all of white 
stone with golden tiles, and it was scarce to be seen 
for the cloud of fierce eagles that were flying about it. 
He tethered his donkeys and his four rams and drove 
on his flock of lambs till he was come near, when he 
shouted, “O ye Eagles! I have brought you a gift, no 
less than a fat lamb for each one of you. Take them, 
therefore, and remember me in kindness!” And the 
eagles swooped down and each snatched up a lamb in 
its talons and winged away to eat it. 

Taking his four rams, and leading his train of don- 
keys, he rode on to the outer gate, where two huge 
tawny lions ramped and roared at him. Said he, “O 



Il6 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

Lions, I bring you each a ram. Take them and remem- 
ber me in kindness.” And they pounced upon two of 
the rams and began to devour them and let him enter. 

In the same manner he passed the inner gate, giv- 
ing the two rams that remained to the lions that 
guarded it, and so came with his train of donkeys into 
the courtyard, which was filled with sweet-smelling 
shrubs, and there he dismounted and scattered the 
wheat and poured the honey the donkeys carried on 
the ground, saying, “O ye Bees and Ants! I bring you 
wheat and honey as a gift. Take them and remember 
me in kindness.” And the bees buzzed from the shrubs 
and the ants swarmed from the ground, and began to 
feast upon them. 

Then, mindful of the Lubiya’s warning, Visojidha 
cut twigs from the shrubs and with his girdle bound 
them together into a broom and going to the castle 
door began to sweep it, and no sooner was it clean 
than it opened to him and he entered, finding himself 
in a room whose walls were of silver. With his broom 
he swept these also and when he had thus cleaned 
them a door in one wall opened and he passed through 
it into a room of gold, with hangings of crimson 
damask. In its corner, in an iron cage, was a great 
leopard, which clawed the bars and screamed at him, 
and before it, sitting on a golden chair, he beheld the 



THE BOY WHO WAS FATED TO BE A KING 117 
Beautiful-of-the-Earth, with eleven lovely girls fan- 
ning her with fans of peacock feathers. She was more 
lovely, however, than all of them put together, more 
beautiful than could be painted in a picture or written 
in a song. 

When they saw him, her eleven companions cried 
out in fear, and she sprang up in rage, exclaiming, 
“How hast thou, a man, come here?” 

Said Visojidha, “By little and little. I have come 
to take thee from the forest.” 

At that she ran into her silver room and cried, “O 
my walls and doors ! Why have ye not fallen upon him 
and crushed him?” 

They answered, “In all the while we have served 
thee never didst thou sweep us, but he has swept us 
clean!”- 

She ran outside and cried, “O my Bees and Ants! 
Why have ye failed to sting him and drive him 
away?” 

They replied, “Thou hast never given us more than 
dirty water and crumbs of mouldy bread, while he 
has given us fresh wheat and honey.” 

She ran then to the gates and screamed, "O my 
Lions! Why did ye not rend him when he tried to en- 
ter?” 

Said they, “Thou hast thrown us now and then 



Il8 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

bits of stale meat and little enough of that, while he 

has given us live rams!” 

Lastly she shouted to the eagles, “O my swift 
Eagles! Why have ye let him come near my gates?” 

And they said to her, “Why should we not? Thou 
hast always left us to gain our food as we might. He 
has given us young and tender lambs!” 

Then said she to Visojidha, “He who wins me from 
my palace must perform three tasks which I shall set 
him. And if he fail in any one of them he shall be tom 
by my leopard. Hast thou courage enough to try 
them?” 

He replied, “Yes.” 

Said she, “Forty princes have won thus far and all 
of them my leopard has torn in pieces and their bodies 
have been devoured by my lions. Try not what thou 
canst not accomplish, but go. For thou art a hand- 
some boy and I would spare thee.” 

But he answered, “I will not leave here without 
thee.” 

At that she said to her maidens, “Bring eleven pail- 
fuls of wheat and eleven pailfuls of poppy seed and 
heap them together in the courtyard.” 

They did so, and she led him there and said, “It is 
now sunset. Before sunrise thou shalt separate these 
grains one from the other into two piles, without a 



THE BOY WHO WAS FATED TO BE A KING II9 
light. And see thou make no error, even by so much 
as a single grain!” So saying, she left him there and 
withdrew into her golden room with her eleven 
maidens. 

When Visojidha saw the great heap, with each 
grain of wheat no bigger than a louse, and each poppy 
seed smaller than the head of a pin, he said to himself 
in despair, “The task she has set me is impossible, 
and her leopard will tear me in shreds!” But by the 
last rays of the sun he beheld the army of ants swarm- 
ing from their holes in the ground and falling upon 
the pile, carrying the wheat to one side and the poppy 
seed to another, and he lay down content and went to 
sleep. 

At daybreak he awoke, and lo, there were two piles, 
one of wheat and one of poppy seed, nor was there a 
single grain out of its place. 

When the Beautiful-of-the-Earth came from her 
golden room and saw the task completed, she was 
astonished. Said she, “Thou art no ordinary man! 
But my next task is harder.” And she said to her 
maidens, “Come with me, and we shall all put on 
dresses that are alike and veil our faces with veils, 
and he shall tell which of us is I.” 

She led them away to robe themselves, and pres- 
ently they came forth, each as like to another as to 



120 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

her reflection in a mirror, so that Visojidha’s heart 
sank, and he said to himself, “Alas! No man could do 
it, and her lions will gnaw my bones!” 

As he thought thus a bee alighted on his sleeve, 
and he whispered to it, “O little Bee, to whom I 
brought the honey! Bid thy comrades creep under the 
veils and tell me which she is!” 

The bee buzzed “bz-zrz-z-z” and vanished and pres- 
ently came back with eleven more. Each crept under 
a veil, and in a moment all flew away but one, which 
rested on the head of one of the twelve, when Viso- 
jidha sprang forward and touched her, saying, “Thou 
art the one!” 

All unveiled their faces then, and the one he had 
touched was indeed the BeautifuI-of-the-Earth. Ex- 
claimed she, “Thou hast won further than any other 
hath done! But my third and last task thou wilt not 
accomplish, no, never! Across forty rivers and forty 
valleys are the Moving Mountains, that open and 
shut each midday. Within the opening is the spring 
of the water-of-life. Take this phial and bring it to me 
within three days filled with the water.” 

So saying she gave him a crystal phial and said she, 
“If thou come back without the water, thou shalt 
have no mercy from me!” 

Visojidha took the phial and put it in his breast 



THE BOY WHO WAS FATED TO BE A KING 1 21 
and led his horse from the castle, exclaiming, “Who 
knows where the Moving Mountains are to-be found, 
and how can I search them out in three days?” And 
he sat down on the ground outside the outer gate in 
hopelessness. 

But as he sat, lo, the thousand eagles ceased their 
circling, and flying down to him, drew together, inter- 
locking their wings so that they were like a carpet. 
Said he to himself, “They mean to bear me there!” 
And he seated himself on the feathered carpet and 
they soared with him into the air and flew with him 
so swiftly that his ears smoked. A day and a half they 
flew, setting him down just at midday, before two 
tall mountains that leaned together, and hardly had 
he put foot to ground than the mountains opened 
with a bumbullim of thunder. 

He took the phial from his breast and ran into the 
chasm, where he found a spring of water as white as 
goats’ milk. He filled the phial from it and ran back — 
the mountains closing so quickly that they took the 
heel from his boot — and mounted the eagle carpet, 
that soared into the sky and bore him in another day 
and a half to the castle in the Lubiya’s forest where it 
set him down before the outer gate. 

He entered the castle and in the golden room found 
the Beautiful-of-the-Earth feasting with her maidens. 



122 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

When she saw the phial filled with the milk-white 
water-of-life she wept, and all the others wept with 
her. Said she, “Fate has ordained that I go with him, 
and there is no help for it!” And she put on a silver 
robe with a crimson girdle, and he set her before him 
on his horse and rode away through the dark forest, 
leading his train of donkeys. 

Thus he came halfway to its edge, where the Lu- 
biya sat on her haunches. 

Snarled she, “Well, thou hast gained the Beautiful 
of-the-Earth, and I have kept my word with thee! 
But though I promised to aid thee thus far, I made no 
promise of more. Now I shall eat you both, and after 
you thy donkeys!” And she rushed to devour them. 

But he spurred his steed, and drove the donkeys 
before him at all speed, with the Lubiya screeching 
and scrambling after. So for a time he kept ahead, 
and when she caught up with him he cut loose the 
rearmost donkey with his sword. Being very hungry 
she stopped to eat it, while he fled on. Again she 
overtook him and he cut loose a second donkey, and 
this he did with all the two hundred, one after the 
other, and while she was devouring the last, he came 
out onto the open plain, where the Lubiya could not 
follow him, with the Beautiful-of-the-Earth safe in his 


arms. 



THE BOY WHO WAS FATED TO BE A KING 123 

So he rode back to the capital, and so great was her 
beauty that the people crowded the streets to gaze 
at her. He rode to the palace and brought her to the 
King, and the King rejoiced and led her to Ndrek, to 
whom he said, “Now thou wilt be well again, and to- 
morrow thou shalt wed her.” 

But Visojidha had fallen so deep in love with the 
Beautiful-of-the-Earth that he could scarce set one 
foot before another. He went to his poor pallet in the 
servants’ quarters and lay down with his sword under 
his pillow, weeping that his oath forbade his declaring 
the truth to the King and that the rascal Ndrek was 
to possess her. 

As for Ndrek, he said to himself, “Though I have 
the Beautiful-of-the-Earth, I shall never be safe while 
Visojidha is alive. Sooner or later he will betray me!” 
And he called one of his favorites and gave him a 
purse of gold, and said he, “Go to my servant Viso- 
jidha, and kill him, for he is my enemy. And thou 
shalt be my best friend forever.” 

Accordingly, the other took a dagger and crept 
into the room where Visojidha lay sleeping and woke 
him. Said he, “This I bring thee from Ndrek!” And 
with the words he stabbed him through the heart, 
so that his breath stopped and he died. Then the 
favorite went to Ndrek, where he and the King sat at 



124 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

supper with the BeautifuI-of-the-Earth, and said to 
him, “Thy servant Visojidha has been stabbed to 
death, no doubt in some quarrel with one of his fel- 
lows.” 

When she heard this the Beautiful-of-the-Earth 
turned pale, for in her heart she had fallen in^ love 
with Visojidha, and disliked the crafty Ndrek. Said 
she, “Is not that the name of him who brought me 
from the forest?” 

The King replied, “It is the same.” 

Said she, “I will not believe that the man who van- 
quished me and my magic and outwitted the Lubiya 
has been slain with a common dagger!” 

Said the favorite, “Nevertheless it is true. I have 
just seen his body.” 

She answered, “I will believe it only when I have 
seen it also.” 

So all four of them went to the room where Viso- 
jidha’s body lay on his pallet. 

But when she saw him, she drew from her sleeve 
the phial which held the water-of-life, and poured it 
into his mouth, and instantly the dagger-wound grew 
together and he sprang up alive. And seeing them 
about him, and the bloody pallet, he knew what had 
happened, and he snatched his sword from under his 
pillow and struck a blow that smote the murderer’s 



THE BOY WHO WAS FATED TO BE A KING 1 25 
head from his body. Said he to Ndrek, “I swore to 
thee that I would not betray thee to the day of my 
death, but now I am free from my oath.” 

Then he told the King the whole story, and the 
King summoned his soldiers and they dragged the 
cowardly Ndrek to a place outside the city wall where 
four trees were growing. They tied ropes to their tops 
and bent them together, and binding him to them by 
his hands and feet, they let them fly asunder so that 
he was torn to pieces. 

As for Visojidha, he married the Beautiful-of-the- 
Earth himself, and he sent for his foster parents, and 
the King made him his son and he ruled that land 
after him. 

Now this is my tale and my tale is done . 

Health to us, all of us, everyone! 





THE BOY WHO STOLE THE NIGHTINGALE 
THAT WAS CALLED GIZARI 

O NCE — however it came about, let it be as it 
may! — there was a King of this Land-of-the- 
Eagles who died, leaving three sons to rule the king- 
dom together after him. The first was named Imer, 
the second was named Mar ash, and the third was 
named Rasim. 


129 


130 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

After they had buried him and mourned for him 
properly Imer, the eldest, said to the others, “Our 
father was a great king and built many palaces and 
mosques for the worship of God. We should walk in 
his footsteps. I, being the eldest son, shall build a 
mosque more splendid than the largest of his, in 
which only I may kneel to pray, so that all men shall 
know my nobleness.” 

Accordingly he took a half of all the gold his father 
had left to him as his share, and summoned the great- 
est architects and built a mosque of tile, with a 
minaret taller than any in the capital, and spread on 
its floor a costly silken carpet, and over its door he 
placed a golden tablet on which was engraved, “None 
may pray here but I, Imer the Great.” 

Now the fame of the mosque and its richness went 
abroad, and each day, as he knelt alone on its splen- 
did carpet, Imer grew more prideful. But the kings 
of neighboring countries, who journeyed there to see 
it, when they read the tablet over its door, went away 
smiling. 

One day when he went there he saw standing before 
it an aged Dervish with a long white beard and a 
green turban. Said he to the stranger, “What thinkest 
thou of this mosque which I have built? Surely there 



THE BOY WHO STOLE THE NIGHTINGALE I3I 
can be none to compare with it in the white world.” 

The Dervish, however, combing his long beard 
with his fingers, made no reply, so that Imer said, 
“It is difficult, no doubt, for thee to find words to 
express thy admiration. Nevertheless, do thy best and 
it will not displease me.” But still the Dervish re- 
mained silent. 

Then Imer was filled with anger, and cried he, 
“Say in one word whether this mosque is not the 
most glorious of all in any land beneath the sun!” 

Said the Dervish then, “It lacks one thing, without 
which it will never be perfect.” And with the words 
he departed. 

Imer went to the palace in an ill-humor, saying to 
himself, “The Dervish is a donkey!” But remember- 
ing how the kings who had seen the mosque had gone 
away smiling, he thought, “Perhaps, indeed, it does 
lack something of perfection, which they noticed.” 
And day by day his dissatisfaction grew, till at last 
he pulled it down to its foundation stones and threw 
the tiles of which it had been built into the river. 

When his brothers saw the mosque in ruins, they 
asked him, “Why hast thou done this?” He replied, 
“It lacked something, though I know not what.” 

Then Marash, the second of the three, said, “In 



132 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

my turn I shall build a mosque.” And he spent three 
quarters of the gold his father had left him for ma- 
terials and built one of gray stone that was even 
larger and handsomer than liner’s had been. It had 
carved doorways and crimson curtains, and over its 
entrance was inscribed, “Only Beys of noble birth 
may pray in this mosque of Marash.” So splendid 
was it that nobles of the whole countryside came to 
kneel in it. The common people, however, when they 
learned the meaning of the characters written over its 
entrance, made a mock of it and threw fish-heads in 
the street before it. But Marash took great pride in 
it and said a prayer in it every day. 

One afternoon, as he was about to enter its door, 
he saw on the threshold the white-bearded Dervish 
with the green turban. Said he, “Men call this 
mosque of mine the finest in any land. Thinkest thou 
not they speak truly?” 

The Dervish, however, cast his eyes upward and 
said nothing. Then Marash said to him, “Canst thou 
not speak? Is there any more splendid on the earth?” 
But to this also the stranger was silent. So that 
Marash, angered, exclaimed, “Thou tongueless dolt! 
Answer me, or it will go hard with thee!” 

Then the Dervish said, “One thing thy mosque 
lacks, without which it can never be perfect.” And 



THE BOY WHO STOLE THE NIGHTINGALE I33 
with the words he mingled with the crowd of the 
street. 

Marash went to the palace in rage, thinking, 
“What does the ignorant lout know of real splendor?” 
But as he thought, he remembered the fish-heads, and 
said to himself, “Can it be that the Dervish is right, 
and that there is in fact something missing in the 
structure that even common people have perceived?” 
The more he reflected, the more dissatisfied he grew, 
till in the end he had the building pulled down, so 
that not one stone was left upon another. 

When his brothers Imer and Rasim saw what he 
had done, they questioned him and he replied that, 
beautiful as it was, it missed the perfection he had 
desired and no longer pleased him. 

Then said Rasim, the youngest, “It is my turn 
now to build one.” And he took all the fortune his 
father had left to him and bought white marble, and 
built of it a mosque neither large nor small, but as 
lovely as a white flower, over whose entrance was 
engraved these words: “Let all who will enter freely 
to pray with Rasim.” 

Now though the building was not of great size, it 
was so beautiful that folk talked of it more than they 
had talked of both the others put together, and there 
was no day when visitors from afar did not come to 



134 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

see it. The inscription over its doorway pleased noble 
and humble, rich and poor, and all who prayed in it 
praised its builder’s wisdom and modesty. 

One evening, as Rasim rose from his prayer, he 
saw standing in its doorway the old Dervish of the 
white beard and green turban, and he said to him, “I 
am the builder of this mosque and I desire it to be a 
thing unsurpassed. Has it, in thine eyes, any lack 
which I may make good?” 

Twice he repeated the words and the Dervish 
made no reply. The third time, however, he answered, 
“It lacks one single thing, without which it cannot be 
perfect.” 

Said Rasim, then, “Glory to thy tongue! I pray 
thee tell me what it is, that I may supply it.” 

The Dervish answered, “It is the nightingale called 
Gizari. If thou hadst her to sing in it, there would in- 
deed be none other such a mosque in the white 
world.” 

Asked Rasim, “Where is that nightingale to be 
found?” 

The Dervish replied, “That I cannot tell thee. I 
only know that its song is the most beautiful that 
man’s ear has ever heard.” 

Rasim went to his brothers Imer and Marash and 
told them what the Dervish had said. Exclaimed' 



THE BOY WHO STOLE THE NIGHTINGALE 135 
Imer, “Insolent rascal! Why did he not tell me?” 
And cried Marash, “He might have told me as well! 
If he shows his face again he shall lose his ears!” But 
Rasim said, “Let us start out together in search of 
the nightingale Gizari, and if we find her, when she 
is singing in the mosque we shall know that by our 
mutual efforts it has reached perfection and God will 
favor us equally. And, since we are the sons of a King 
and it does not become us to fail, let us swear that we 
will not return without her.” 

The other two agreed to this and they bade their 
ministers rule wisely during their absence, and set 
out on the road, asking every traveler they met if he 
knew where the bird was to be found. But each of 
them answered, “Though we have listened to many 
tales of this and that, of the nightingale called Gizari 
we have never heard.” 

Now when they had journeyed thus for twenty 
days they came one morning to a place where stood a 
white stone, where, the road forked into three trails, 
and Rasim said, “Let us separate here and each take 
a different trail. And let the one who finds the night- 
ingale return here and go in search of the others.” 

This seemed good to the rest and they kissed one 
another, saying, “Mayest thou go on a smooth road !” 
and set out, each in a different direction. 



136 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

The trail which Imer, the eldest, took led to the 
north, and he went as far as he went till he grew tired. 
Said he to himself, “Of what use is it to plod forever 
up one side of a mountain and down the other, search- 
ing for what may not be anywhere? For how do we 
know but that the Dervish lied ? I will wager he never 
heard of a nightingale called Gizari !” But he dreaded 
to return to his home lest he be shamed by the break- 
ing of his oath, and coming to a pleasant town nestled 
in a fruitful valley, he apprenticed himself to a bar- 
ber, and made his living by shaving men’s heads. 

Marash’s trail pointed southward, and he went as 
far as he went till he also became weary of the jour- 
neying. Said he to himself, “One may trudge this trail 
to the very end of the earth without finding the 
cursed bird!” And he, too, remembered the oath he 
had sworn and dreaded to return, and coming to a 
prosperous city on the bank of a river, he opened a 
coffee stall in its bazaar and made his livelihood by 
selling coffee to the merchants and tradesmen. 

So Imer and Marash, having no heart for the toil of 
the way, gave over the search and each looked after 
his own affairs. As for Rasim, the youngest, however, 
he followed his trail, which led to the eastward, for 
three months, till he came to a land that was wild and 
desolate, in the midst of savage mountains, where was 



THE BOY WHO STOLE THE NIGHTINGALE I37 
neither farm nor roadhouse nor dwelling, but only 
rough rocks and fir trees. 

As he threaded these wastes he came one morning 
to a woman, clad only in a robe of twisted tree bark, 
who was combing her tangled hair with a stick. Pity- 
ing her condition, he took his comb from his girdle 
bag and combed her hair for her, cleaning it of the 
dust and leaves it had gathered, at which she was 
greatly pleased. Said she, “O Stranger, never have I 
seen a thing like that. What is its name?” 

“It is called a comb,” he answered. “If thou wilt I 
will give it to thee.” 

Said she, “Folk do not give for nothing, and what 
have I to offer thee in exchange?” 

He replied, “Thou hast only to answer a ques- 
tion.” 

She asked, “What is thy question?” and he said, 
“I am in search of the nightingale called Gizari. In 
thy wanderings among these mountains hast thou 
ever heard of her?” 

“Never,” she answered. “Thou wilt not find her in 
these parts, where is nothing but rocks and trees. Go 
back the way thou earnest, for beyond here the land 
is ruled by wild beasts. Even I dare not go there.” 

“Nevertheless,” said he, “I must follow my 
search.” 



I38 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

Then said she, “In return for thy comb, I will tell 
thee one thing. The next mountain is ruled by a Leop- 
ard as huge as an ox. Thou canst pass his domain 
only by gaining favor of his wife. Thou must speak 
with her, however, before noon, at which time he re- 
turns to his house. If he is there when thou reachest 
it he will devour thee in three mouthfuls.” 

Said he, “I shall live or die as God pleases.” And 
bidding her farewell, he went on to the mountain. 

It still lacked an hour to noon when he smelled the 
leopard smell and soon after he came to the Leopard’s 
house, which was built of rocks. Smoke was pouring 
from its chimney, and looking through its window he 
saw the Leopard’s wife making bread. He knocked at 
the door and when she opened it she saw him with as- 
tonishment. 

“What!” she exclaimed. “Art thou a man?” 

He replied, “Yes.” 

Said she, “I have not seen a man since twenty 
years ago when the Leopard stole me away and 
brought me here to be his wife. Hasten back the way 
thou earnest, for when he comes he will devour thee!” 

Said Rasim, “Let him do what he will with me.” 
And he sat down and watched her make the bread. 
When she had kneaded the dough and shaped it into 
loaves, ready to be baked, she opened the door of 



THE BOY WHO STOLE THE NIGHTINGALE 1 39 
the stove to sweep the ashes from the hot coals, and 
he saw that she was sweeping them with her breasts. 
He bade her wait, and going outside the house, cut 
some twigs and bound them with his girdle into a 
broom and with this he swept the fire for her. She 
was delighted at this. Said she, “Whenever I bake 
bread for the Leopard I burn my breasts and am abed 
for ten days afterward! Now I need do so no more.” 

When the bread was done she broke a loaf and gave 
him some, and while he was eating it there sounded a 
dreadful scream from the mountainside. “That is my 
husband returning!” she exclaimed, and opening the 
door of the cupboard, she bade him hide in it. 

Scarce had he concealed himself when in came the 
Leopard, with his claws stretching and his neck hairs 
bristling — so huge that his shoulders brushed the top 
of the doorway. Growled he, angrily, “Wife, why 
hast thou not baked my bread ?” 

She replied, “I have baked it.” 

Said he, “How, then, do I find thee on thy feet? 
Always after the bread-baking thou art ill and unable 
to rise from thy bed.” 

She answered, “I have found a way to do it without 
burning myself.” And she set a loaf before him, which 
he ate, saying, “It is better than the last batch and 
does not taste of ashes.” 



140 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

Then she asked him, “ If I should tell thee that a 
man had shown me how to bake it thus, wouldst thou 
eat him?” 

“No,” he replied. “I would kiss him on the fore- 
head and make him my brother.” 

When she heard this, she brought Rasim from the 
cupboard. “Here is the one who showed me,” she told 
him. And the Leopard kissed him on the forehead and 
asked he, “O my brother, what has brought thee 
here?” 

Said Rasim, “I have built a mosque to the glory of 
God, but it lacks one thing to make it perfect, and 
that is the nightingale that is called Gizari. I have 
searched over a hundred mountains and valleys and 
still have not found her.” 

The Leopard answered, “I have heard of her, 
though I cannot tell thee where she is. My father, the 
Lion, who rules the next mountain to this, may know, 
but if he sees thee he will devour thee in two mouth- 
fuls. The only way thou canst find out is through his 
wife.” 

“How may I gain favor with her?” asked Rasim. 

Said the Leopard, “Thou canst see her only at 
midafternoon, while the Lion is asleep, when she sits 
on the doorstep sunning herself. She is a hundred 
years old and her eyelids cover her eyes like a hat so 



THE BOY WHO STOLE THE NIGHTINGALE I4I 
that she cannot see, but her ears are so keen that she 
can hear the twitch of a mouse’s whisker. So speak to 
her while thou art still some distance away, before she 
hears thy step and wakes the Lion to rend thee. Say 
to her, ‘The brother of thy husband’s son, the Leop- 
ard, greets thee,’ and she will receive thee in kind- 
ness.” 

Rasim thanked the Leopard and bade them fare- 
well and went on his way to the next mountain. He 
walked one hour, he walked two hours, and at length 
he smelled the lion smell and presently came in sight 
of the Lion’s house, where the Lion’s wife sat on the 
doorstep dozing in the sun. Mindful of the Leopard’s 
warning he stepped as softly as he could, but while he 
was still a long way off a twig broke under his foot, 
and she lifted her head. At that he spoke, saying, “O 
Mother, the brother of thy husband’s son, the Leop- 
ard, greets thee.” 

Said she, “Come close and let me see thee.” 

So he came to her and lifted her eyelids so that she 
could see him, when she exclaimed, “There is truth in 
thy face! But thou art a man. What dost thou here, 
where I have seen no man these many years, since 
the Lion stole me from my home to be his wife?” 

He told her of his search, and she said, “My hus- 
band, in truth, knows the nightingale’s whereabouts. 



142 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

but the only way I can find out his secrets is by lead- 
ing him to talk in his sleep.” 

Just then the Lion, hearing their voices through his 
slumber, rumbled, “Wife! What sound do I hear?” 

She replied, “My dear husband, it is only the wind 
blowing through the trees.” 

Said he, “To-morrow I will cut them down!” and 
turning over, began to snore like twenty wild boars. 

Presently she said to Rasim, “Whistle.” He did so, 
and the Lion, hearing in his dream, grunted, “Wife, I 
hear a sound like a bird singing.” 

She answered, “Dear husband, it comes over the 
tree tops. Can it be the song of the nightingale Gi- 
zari?” 

“Nay,” he said, “the land of Queen Bor, where she 
is, is too far away for us to hear her.” 

“It is, then, a cricket crurping,” said she, and again 
he turned over and went to sleep, snarking and snor- 
ing like the bumbullim of summer thunder. 

Then said she to Rasim, “The land of Queen Bor 
is to the eastward, on the other side of the Valley of 
Eagles. But it is perilous to cross, for the eagles that 
rule it are exceedingly fierce, with beaks and claws of 
iron that will tear thee in pieces. Thou canst cross it 
only by night, when they cannot see thee.” 

“While I have my sword,” Rasim answered, “they 



THE BOY WHO STOLE THE NIGHTINGALE I43 
shall not bar me!” And he thanked her and went his 
way to the valley below. He reached its edge at sun- 
set, and being weary, wrapped himself in his cloak 
and lay down to sleep beneath a tree. He was awak- 
ened at dawn by a chirping above his head, and look- 
ing up saw a snake coiled in the tree, about to seize 
three young eaglets in their nest. He took his girdle 
knife between his teeth and climbing the tree, killed 
the snake and threw its body to the ground. Scarce 
had he descended when a great gray eagle came fly- 
ing, and alighting beside him, threw off its eagle 
feathers and became transformed into a woman 
dressed in a gray robe with a feather headdress. 

Said she, “Sir, I thank thee. But for thy blade 
yonder loathsome serpent would have devoured my 
fledglings. But what dost thou here, where a man 
may not come?” 

He replied, “I journey to the land of Queen Bor.” 

“Thou art on the right trail,” said she, “but it is 
seven days* travel from here, and to reach it thou wilt 
need the aid of my three sisters. Go straight forward 
and thou wilt find their house, thatched with eagle 
feathers, in the center of the valley.” Then she took a 
feather from her headdress and gave it to him. “Show 
them this and they will aid thee,” she said; “but 
guard thyself well meanwhile.” 



144 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

He thanked her and putting the feather in his 
girdle, went on across the valley. One day he went, 
two days he went, and on the third day, as he sat by 
a stream resting, three fierce eagles darted upon him, 
screaming and tearing at him with iron beaks and 
claws. But he drew his sword and fought so strongly 
that the sharp blade wounded all three, one in the leg, 
one in the wing, and one in the breast, so that they 
lay bleeding and helpless. 

He sheathed his sword and went on, but before he 
had gone far pity seized him, and he went back and 
brought water from the stream, and stripping off 
his shirt of fine linen, tore it into three pieces and 
washed and bound up their wounds before he went 
on. 

Whether he went a short way or a long way, he 
came at length to the house thatched with eagle 
feathers. The door stood wide and when no one an- 
swered his knock he entered and found therein three 
beds, each with a coverlet of eagle’s down, and a table 
set with three plates, knives, and spoons and a pitcher 
of water. While he looked about him, he heard the 
rustling of wings and three gray eagles flew down be- 
fore the door and throwing off their eagle feathers be- 
came transformed into women, wearing gray robes 
and feather headdresses, and each bore a bandage of 



THE BOY WHO STOLE THE NIGHTINGALE I45 
white linen, one on her leg, one on her arm, and one 
on her breast. 

They entered, and seeing him, turned pale. But he 
said to them, “Have no fear,” and showing them the 
feather from his girdle, said, “By this sign I claim 
your aid.” Said they, “It is our sister’s. Forgive us 
that we assailed thee, not knowing thee for her 
friend.” And taking up the pitcher from the table 
each in turn poured water upon her wound and when 
they stripped off their bandages the flesh showed no 
sign of hurt. He related to them how he had saved 
the three eaglets from the snake, and they exclaimed, 
“They are our three dear little nephews, and we are 
beholden to thee. How may we aid thee?” 

He replied, “I journey to the land of Queen Bor.” 

Said they, “Her capital is three days’ travel from 
here. Stay here with us till to-morrow and we will 
guide thee and give thee protection on thy trail.” 

He stayed gladly with them that night, and next 
morning they donned their eagle feathers and he set 
out, they flying before him by day and by night cir- 
cling above him while he slept, till he came within 
sight of the capital of Queen Bor. There they flewdown 
and gave him each a feather, saying, “ Shouldst thou 
need our further aid, come to this spot and bum these 
and we will hasten to thee.” 



I46 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

So saying they winged away and he entered the 
capital, finding it a noble city of towers and gardens. 
In its center was the Queen’s palace and he chose an 
inn which overlooked its garden and rested there from 
his long journey. 

That evening at dusk as he sat in the inn, he heard 
a sound so beautiful that he was ravished by it, and 
said he to the landlord, “What is that?” The man 
answered, “That is our young Queen’s nightingale 
singing. Each day at this hour she walks with her 
maidens in the palace garden, where the cage of the 
nightingale is hung in its pavilion.” 

Now about the garden was a high wall and when 
the dark deepened Rasim went there, and tying a 
stone in the end of his girdle, threw it over the wall 
and climbed to its top, and thus he beheld the young 
Queen Bor — who was so named from her snow-white 
complexion, the word Bor meaning snow in that land 
— strolling among the fruit trees. She was so beautiful 
that he held his breath to see her, and at first sight he 
felt his heart fly out of his breast for love of her. Said 
he to himself, “How can I think to rob her I love of 
her nightingale? Yet I am bound by mine oath to do 
so!” 

The next day, at twilight, he climbed the wall and 
presently Queen Bor came with her maidens from the 



THE BOY WHO STOLE THE NIGHTINGALE I47 
palace and hanging the nightingale’s cage in the 
pavilion, sat down on the grass beneath a pome- 
granate tree, while the rest wandered about, plucking 
and eating the luscious fruits. After a time he heard 
one say, “The Queen sleeps. Let us go further away 
so that we shall not waken her with our chatter.” 
And they went into the depths of the garden. 

Then Rasim, making no noise, leaped down from 
the wall, and stealing to the pavilion, stretched forth 
his hand to the cage, and when he touched it the 
nightingale burst into sweeter song than ever. But 
he saw the Queen lying asleep so near, and her beauty 
drew him like a rope, so that he turned from the cage, 
and bent over her and kissed her cheek. Instantly, 
however, she stirred, and seeing that she was about to 
waken he made haste to climb the wall and leaped 
down on the other side. 

Waking, Queen Bor called her maidens, and said 
to them, “Go and look in the pavilion and see if my 
nightingale Gizari is safe.” They hastened to look, 
and returning, told her, “She sits on her perch, eating 
caraway seed.” Said the Queen, “I dreamed a man 
came to steal her away.” 

She rose then, and taking the cage from the pavil- 
ion, carried it into the palace, thinking, “The dream 
has frightened me, for my heart beats strangely.” 



148 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

As for Rasim he went back to the inn angered at him- 
self for having failed in his purpose. 

The next evening he again climbed the wall, and 
again the Queen came from the palace with her maid- 
ens, and hanging the cage of the nightingale in the 
pavilion, said to them, “Let us play at ball.” This 
they did till she said, “I am tired and will rest 
awhile,” and they wandered to the further depths of 
the garden while she lay down on the grass and fell 
asleep. And again Rasim, watching, leaped down 
from the wall and crept to the pavilion to steal the 
nightingale. But a second time, when he passed the 
Queen and saw her loveliness as she slept, her beauty 
overcame him and he leaned and kissed her on the 
mouth. But at that she stirred, and seeing that she 
was about to wake, he ran to the wall and escaped as 
on the night before. 

Waking, the Queen called her maidens and bade 
them look in the pavilion and see if the nightingale 
was safe. Again they returned and told her, “She 
bathes in her golden bowl.” And again she said, “I 
dreamed a man came to steal her away.” And she 
carried the cage into the palace, saying to herself, 
“There was more to my dream, that has gone from 
me, but it has made my heart beat even more 
strangely than it did yesterday.” 



THE BOY WHO STOLE THE NIGHTINGALE I49 

Rasim went back to his inn more angered at him- 
self that he had failed a second time in his purpose, 
and thinking, “With the Queen in my sight I shall 
never be able to steal the nightingale from her, no, 
never!” And he lay all that night hopeless and griev- 
ing. 

The next day, however, he remembered the eagles. 
He went outside the city to the place where the three 
eagles had parted from him, and striking fire from his 
flint and steel, burned the three feathers they had 
given him. 

He waited an hour, he waited two hours, and three 
hours, and at dusk the eagles flew down from the sky 
to him and threw off their eagle feathers. Said they, 
“O our friend! Long life to thee! What is thy need?” 

He answered, “Glory to your wings! I came hither 
to steal from Queen Bor her nightingale that is called 
Gizari, but alas! I have fallen deeper than the deep 
sea in love with her, and my heart fails me!” 

Said they, “It will be easy for us to do it for thee, 
since it sings each evening in the pavilion of the royal 
garden.” And they bade him not to reenter the city, 
but to make his way to their house in the Valley-of- 
Eagles. So saying, they donned their feathers and 
springing into the air, winged swiftly to the city. 
There they hovered high over the garden of the palace 



ISO ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

till the Queen had fallen asleep and her maidens 
wandered away, when they swooped down, and 
snatching the cage from the pavilion, sped away with 
it in their talons through the upper air to the house 
that was thatched with eagle feathers. There at 
length Rasim arrived, and the nightingale, when she 
saw him, burst into such song that all the buds on the 
bushes opened. 

Next day the eagles flew with him to the edge of the 
valley, where they bade him farewell, and he took the 
backward trail over the mountains, carrying the cage, 
with the nightingale singing all the way. 

He passed the spot where he had killed the snake, 
and the gray eagle flew down from her nest and threw 
off her eagle feathers to greet him. He told her of his 
meeting with her sisters and the aid they had given 
him, and she said, “Well I knew thou wouldst not 
fail. Good luck and long life to thee!” 

He came at mid-afternoon to the mountain of 
the Lion, whose wife he found sitting on the door- 
step sunning herself. While still a long way off he 
covered the nightingale’s cage with his cloak so that 
it should not sing, and greeted her as before. And said 
she, when he had lifted her eyelids so that she could 
see his face, “Well I knew thou wouldst succeed! A 
smooth trail to thee!” 



THE BOY WHO STOLE THE NIGHTINGALE IS I 

Now as before the Lion heard their voices in his 
sleep, and rumbled, “0 Wife! What is the sound I 
hear?” She answered, “My dear husband, what if it 
were a man for thee to eat?” Said he, “Cease thy 
jesting with me when I am sleeping!” And he turned 
over and began to snore like an avalanche. 

Rasim went on to the next mountain, where the 
Leopard and his wife greeted him in friendship. Said 
the Leopard, “Well I knew thou wouldst gain the 
nightingale, O my brother!” And both wished him a 
fair journey. 

Lastly he came to the barren waste of rocks and 
trees, where he found the wild woman, in her robe of 
twisted bark, combing her hair with the comb he had 
given her. Said she, “So thou hast found the night- 
ingale! WTiat wilt thou do with her?” 

He replied, “I shall hang her in my mosque and 
she shall sing while I say my prayers.” 

Said she, “Well, good luck and long life to thee! 
Say a prayer for me that I may not break my comb.” 

Now whether he journeyed a short while or a long 
while, Rasim came at last to the place of the white 
stone, where the road forked and where he had parted 
from his two brothers, and according to their agree- 
ment, he set out to find them. 

First, he took the northern trail that Imer, his 



152 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

eldest brother, had followed, making inquiry of all he 
met. So at length he came to the town in which Imer 
had settled, and seeing a barber’s shop, thought, “I 
will have my head shaved.” He hung the cage of the 
nightingale covered by his cloak in its doorway and 
entered, and lo, the barber was his brother. 

They embraced and kissed one another and when 
he had exhibited the nightingale, Rasim said, “Do 
thou dispose of thy business and when we have found 
our brother Marash, let us go back to our own land 
and to our proper place.” 

That same day, therefore, Imer sold his shop and 
both returned together to the place of the white 
stone, and set out on the trail to the southward, in- 
quiring of all they met. In time they came to the city 
on the river bank where Marash had settled. They 
searched it one day, they searched it two days, and on 
the third day they sat down before a coffee stall, and 
lo, the man who served them was the one they sought. 

All three embraced and kissed each other, and 
Rasim said to Marash, “Do thou get rid of thy busi- 
ness, for now we can all return with good hearts to 
our home.” This was done, and next day they started 
back to their capital. 

Now Imer and Marash were ashamed that Rasim 
had found them in such low employment. When they 



THE BOY WHO STOLE THE NIGHTINGALE 1 53 
thought of the fame he would gain for finding the 
nightingale they were envious and before they had 
gone ten leagues they hated him. Said Imer secretly 
to Marash, “Who is he that he should be counted 
above us?” And Marash answered, “We are the two 
eldest. Let us so arrange that he shall not trouble us.” 

So they formed a plan, and when they came to the 
border of their land they fell upon Rasim and bound 
and gagged him, smearing his face with clay so that 
none should know him. When they reached the capi- 
tal they had him thrown into a windowless dungeon, 
over which they set a guard of soldiers, giving out 
that he was a robber, who had attacked them on the 
road. To their ministers they said, “After terrible 
hardships and many perils we two have brought the 
nightingale Gizari. Our brother Rasim, however, 
while we were in a distant country, was drowned in a 
mountain stream.” So they sat on their thrones again 
and ruled, and they hung the cage of the nightingale 
in the mosque of white marble, and folk came from 
the most distant countries to hear her, and carried the 
fame of the mosque over the white world. 

Thus it was with them. But as for Queen Bor, when 
she woke and found that the nightingale had vanished 
from the pavilion, she was dismayed. She summoned 
her guard, who searched every bush of the garden. 



154 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

and when the bird could not be found, she sent criers 
throughout her whole realm, offering a great reward. 
At last she despatched messengers to many neighbor- 
ing countries, bidding them bring her word of any 
bird which might be her lost treasure. 

At the end of a year one of these returned and said, 
“0 Queen’s Majesty! In the furthest land to which I 
journeyed, I heard tell of a singing bird in a land still 
more distant, which is kept in the chief mosque of its 
capital. While I could not learn by what name it is 
called, it was said that folk came from near and far to 
hear it, and by reason of its song the mosque was 
counted the most famous in the white world.” 

Exclaimed she, “That is my nightingale!” and she 
bade raise a great army, and armed and provisioned 
it, and putting herself at its head, marched to attack 
the land of the two Princes, sending heralds in ad- 
vance to summon them to prepare for the battle. 

Now when Imer and Marash learned that a great 
host was advancing to lay waste their land and capi- 
tal, they summoned their ministers and asked them, 
“Why should this be?” The Prime Minister an- 
swered, “It has reached us that the Queen who leads 
the host lays claim to the nightingale Gizari, whose 
song has made the city’s mosque of marble the most 
famous in the white world.” 



THE BOY WHO STOLE THE NIGHTINGALE 155 

At this the pair were in great fear. Said they to one 
another, “Our troops cannot withstand the army that 
is coming. Let us hide away the nightingale and put a 
common bird in her place, so that when the Queen 
comes she will be deceived and will return to her own 
land.” They gave the bird to the head of their officers, 
bidding him conceal her. 

Asked he, “Where shall she be put?” 

Marash replied, “There is no place so secret and 
secure as the prison that holds the robber.” So the 
other carried the cage to the windowless dungeon, 
where Rasim lay grieving at his condition, and thrust 
it through the door, saying, “Here is a bird to keep 
thee company!” And at sight of him the nightingale 
began to sing so sweetly that the prison rats crept 
from their holes to hear. 

As for Imer and Marash, they took a wild thrush 
and put it in a cage and hung it in the mosque and 
sent messengers to Queen Bor to say for them, “Long 
life to Thy Majesty! Though we know not the pur- 
pose of thy coming, we give thee welcome as our royal 
guest.” 

In reply she sent them a letter, which said: 

“And to you. Prince Imer and Prince Marash, long life! 
I come to take my nightingale Gizari from your mosque. 



156 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

and if ye do not surrender it, there shall be bloody war 

betwixt our armies.” 


To this they returned a soft answer, saying, “We 
know nothing of thy nightingale. It is true that a 



bird hangs in our mosque, but it is of little value, and 
if thou desirest it, it is our free gift to thee.” 

When she read this, Queen Bor, with her chief 
officers, rode into the city and to the mosque, and 
looked at the wild bird in its cage, sitting silent. Said 
she to them, “This is not my Gizari. But I distrust 
these princes.” And she bade her army encamp out- 




THE BOY WHO STOLE THE NIGHTINGALE 1 57 
side the city walls while she herself entered the palace 
as guest of Prince Imer and Prince Marash, who 
feasted and entertained her for seven days. 

One evening she said to them, “ By your leave I will 
ride with my officers about your city, that its sights 
may divert me. For this is the hour when my lost 
nightingale was used to sing most sweetly, and I am 
most lonely.” 

They answered, “We will go with thee,” and called 
for their horses and all set out together. So they rode 
through the parks and bazaars, till they chanced to 
skirt the wall of the prison, and suddenly she stopped 
her horse, and said she, “I hear somewhere a bird 
singing.” Said Imer, “This is the city’s prison and no 
bird can be in it.” But she bade all listen and lo, 
muffled by the walls, the song of the nightingale in 
the windowless dungeon came to them. 

Said she to Imer, “Open the prison gate this in- 
stant!” And, trembling, he gave the order. She 
straightway entered, and bade her officers search, till 
guided by the song, they burst open the door of the 
dungeon where Rasim lay in chains, with the jeweled 
cage beside him and the nightingale singing on its 
perch. 

When she saw that it was indeed her Gizari, she 
looked at the cowardly brothers with eyes that shot 



I5& ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

forth black fire, and Imer, stammering, said, “0 
Queen, it was not we who stole her, but this man. We 
knew not the bird was thine till thou earnest with thy 
troops. Then we were ashamed that he should have 
brought this reproach upon us, and though he is our 
own younger brother, we had him dragged here.” 

Asked she of Marash, “Is this true?” 

He answered, “Yes. We waited only thy departure 
to have him hanged, after which we should have sent 
the bird to thee in thine own land.” 

She read the lie in their cowardly faces, and said 
she to her officers, “Take both of them to our camp 
and hold them there.” And when they had gone out 
she asked Rasim, “Didst thou indeed steal my 
nightingale?” 

He replied, “I am guilty before thee! I had built a 
mosque to the glory of God, and I desired her singing 
to make it perfect.” 

“In the light of thy purpose,” she said, “the deed 
could be forgiven thee. But I well know thou didst 
not steal her with thine own hand. Wert thou, in- 
deed, in my garden?” 

He answered, “Yes. I climbed its wall while thou 
wert asleep, not once, but twice. But each time at the 
sight of thy face my heart failed me.” . 

At his words she knew he had fallen in love with 



THE BOY WHO STOLE THE NIGHTINGALE 159 
her, and her heart beat as it had done when she had 
awakened on those two evenings. She suddenly- 
remembered the rest of her dream which she had 
forgotten, and said she, “What didst thou do when 
thy heart failed thee? Tell me, that I may know thou 
art not a liar like thy brothers.” 

He replied, “I kissed thee.” 

Said she, “Do it again! But beware, for I have 
sworn that he who kisses me three times shall be my 
husband.” 

Then, in joy, he embraced her, and they kissed each 
other in love, and he told her all his story. And after- 
ward she led her army into the city and took posses- 
sion of it, and three days later Rasim and she were 
married, the festival lasting a whole month. 

All their lives they lived in happiness together, 
with the nightingale Gizari to sing to them both, 
spending one year in his capital and one in hers. As 
for his brothers, Imer and Marash, they were sent 
into exile, and Imer went back to his barber shop and 
Marash to his coffee stall, and neither was ever heard 
of again. 


They are there and here are we. 
Just a tale for me and thee. 




THE GIRL WHO TOOK A SNAKE FOR 
HUSBAND 





THE GIRL WHO TOOK A SNAKE FOR 
HUSBAND 

T HERE WAS (and what a strange thing it was!) 

in an old time, in a land as far beyond the moun- 
tains as a horse can gallop in a year, a King who had 
three daughters. They were all of an age, and that 
age was the one for marriage. 

It was the custom in that land for all the lads who 
were unmarried, on a certain day of the year to gather 
in the streets, while the maidens threw golden apples 
from the housetops, each marked with the thrower’s 

I63 


164 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

name, and he whom an apple struck wedded the one 

whose name it carried. 

On this day, therefore, the three King’s daughters 
threw their golden apples from the palace roof. One 
of them struck the turban of a Bey’s son, another the 
shoulder of a captain of the King’s guard, but the 
third — which belonged to the Princess Lukja, the 
youngest and the most beautiful of the three — fell on 
a woodcutter’s cart and struck a spotted snake that 
lay coiled among the faggots. 

When the royal officers who were in charge of the 
affair brought the two young men before the King, he 
asked, “Where is the third?” They showed him then 
the spotted snake, coiled in a wicker basket, saying, 
“O King’s Majesty! The third apple struck no youth, 
but this snake, and, as is the law, we have brought 
it to thee.” 

At that the King rose from his throne in rage. Cried 
he, “Take it away and kill it! Is my daughter to be 
given in marriage to a serpent?” 

They replied, “It is true that no one has ever 
known a human maiden to wed a snake, yet our an- 
cient law declares that the fall of the golden apple 
shall decree the husband of its thrower, who, if she 
refuse, shall be put to death.” 

The King summoned his Prime Minister and de- 



THE GIRL WHO TOOK A SNAKE HUSBAND 1 65 
manded his opinion. Said the Prime Minister, “O 
Majesty! This is a great misfortune, but there is no 
way out, and the Princess must indeed marry the 
snake or suffer the penalty.” 

When he heard this the King was greatly troubled. 
He sent for the Princess Lukja and told her. Said he, 
“I know not what can be done, for the law of the 
land is binding on all alike.” 

She answered, “O my father! My old nurse has told 
me of a Wise Woman who lives in the forest. She shall 
take me to her and I will ask her counsel.” 

The nurse took her to the Wise Woman’s hut in 
the depths of the wood, and when she heard what 
had occurred the old dame put a kettle of goat’s milk 
over the fire and stirred it with a sprig of mistletoe 
till it boiled with bubbles as big as fish’s eyes. Then 
she threw into it some herbs, and let it boil till there 
was left only a small quantity in the bottom of the 
kettle. This she poured into a saucer, and making the 
Princess Lukja hold this in her hand, fell to studying 
it. At length she said, “I see reflected in the liquid 
no snake but a man. Thou needst have no fear, my 
dear child. Only count the number of the snake’s 
scales, and come and tell me, and I shall instruct thee 
what to do on thy wedding night.” 

The Princess returned to the palace and said to 



1 66 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

the King, “O my father! It is my fate to marry the 
snake, but have no anxiety for me, for no evil shall 
befall me.” 

He answered, “This will send me to my grave, yet 
I know no help for it! But how wilt thou live with a 
snake as thy husband?” 

“ Build me a little house of stone,” she told him, 
“in the palace garden, and we shall live there.” 

He built her the little stone house, and when all 
was ready and the day set for the wedding, she had 
the snake brought, and counting its scales, found 
them exactly forty, neither one less nor one more. 
Going to the hut in the forest, she told the Wise 
Woman, who said, “Listen carefully, my child, to 
what I say, and fail not to carry out my instructions 
exactly, for if thou dost not, the snake will have no 
choice but to kill thee. 

“First, thou must wear in thy marriage neither 
thirty-nine nor forty-one, but exactly forty, robes of 
thin silk, all of the same color, one over the other. 
After the wedding feast, when you come to your 
house together and enter its inner room, do thou lay 
off the outer one of thy silken robes, saying, *0 my 
husband, wilt thou not put off thy robes also?’ Im- 
mediately it will shed one of its scales. Take off thy 
second robe, and the snake will shed a second scale. 



THE GIRL WHO TOOK A SNAKE HUSBAND 1 67 
Thus continue, doffing thy silken robes one after an- 
other, and with each it will shed another of its scales 
till the last is gone, when thou wilt see its true form. 
Go now, and long life to thee!” 

The Princess Lukja thanked the Wise Woman and 
procured the forty silken robes, and when the day of 
the wedding arrived she dressed herself in them. So 
they were married, and at the wedding feast sat side 
by side, the snake coiled on a brocade cushion. Now 
many rich gifts had been sent, such as are given to 
brides, but her two sisters, who were envious of her 
greater beauty, had chosen in derision a man’s dress 
woven of gold thread, tufted and tasselled, with shoes 
of scarlet leather, and when the guests saw this they 
tittered and jested. But the Princess, as was fitting, 
thanked them and bade that it be carried, with the 
other gifts, to the house in the garden. And thither, 
when the feast was ended, they went, she with her 
head held high, and her snake husband crawling 
'sdrouk- sdrouk- sdrouk before her. 

There the Princess did not fail to carry out exactly 
the Wise Woman’s instructions. When she laid off her 
outer robe in the inner room the snake shed one of its 
scales, and when she put off her innermost robe and it 
shed its fortieth scale, instantly it became transformed 
into a youth with skin as white as snow and of such 



l68 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

beauty that the whole room was lighted. From the 
first sight of her eyes she fell deep as the deep sea in 
love with him, and when he embraced her she could 
not kiss him enough. So they began living together 
in all love and happiness, she counting him a man 
whose like did not exist in the white world. 

In the morning she said to him, “0 my soul, tell 
me who thou art.” 

He answered, “That I cannot do as yet, but one 
day, if thou art faithful to my word, thou shalt know. 
Meanwhile, let no one know that I am not what I 
seem, and when I wear my human form let no harm 
come to my snake-skin, otherwise thou wilt never see 
me again.” When he said this he called to his scales, 
which flew to him and grew fast to his body, and he 
became again the spotted snake. 

Now presently her mother came from the palace 
and knocking at the door, called her name. She let 
her in, and when the Queen saw that she wore a 
shining face, she shed tears of joy. “0 my daughter!” 
she exclaimed. “I thank God that thou art in health, 
for indeed I feared for thee!” 

The Princess replied, “0 Mother mine, be not in 
anxiety, for all will be well with me, and I have no 
regret.” 

Thus a month went over the tops of the mountains. 



THE GIRL WHO TOOK A SNAKE HUSBAND 169 
All day long the spotted snake remained a snake and 
nothing else, lying coiled in its basket and drinking 
milk from a bowl, while the Princess ate meats and 
fruits, and every night becoming the lovely youth who 
*was her husband, each loving the other to distrac- 
tion, while all who knew her pitied her, saying, “Alas 
for the poor girl who is doomed to such a fate!” 

Now in the second month was the yearly carnival, 
and for that night the King commanded a splendid 
ball at the palace. A hundred musicians were sum- 
moned to play for the dancing and the garden was 
decorated with flags and lanterns. To it he invited 
all the notables of the realm, and the Princess Lukja’s 
two elder sisters came with their husbands, who wore 
costly robes of silk brocade. She alone had no partner, 
and seeing her sitting alone they jeered at her, saying, 
“Where is her husband, the snake? She should have 
brought it here to dance with her!” 

While the ball was at its height, the snake in the 
little stone house heard the sound of the music, and 
thinking, “I will see how my darling enjoys herself,” 
crawled ’sdrouk- sdrouk- sdrouk across the garden, and 
climbing an arbor, looked through a window. So, 
seeing her sitting alone while all the rest were merry, 
it pitied her, and returning to their inner room, shed 
its scales, and taking on human form, donned the 



170 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

dress of gold with the crimson shoes, and entered the 

palace like an eagle among crows. 

In the ballroom he took his wife’s hand and led her 
out to dance, and so splendid they looked and so 
gracefully they moved together, that all stood still 
to watch them, wondering who the stranger could 
be. And her sisters, seeing how he outshone their 
husbands, said to one another, “How shameless of 
her, a married woman, to dance thus with a foreigner, 
even though he be a nobleman!” 

At length one said to the other, “Let us go to her 
house and bring the snake in its basket, and when the 
stranger sees it and learns that it is her husband, he 
will despise her.” 

So they stole from the ballroom and ran to the 
stone house and there they found in the snake’s 
basket only its skin. 

When they saw it, they said to one another, “Our 
sister’s husband must be a magician, and it is he 
in his proper form that is dancing with her to- 
night! Is not the suit he is wearing the very style and 
color of the one that was our wedding gift? His magic 
lies in his snake-skin. Let us bum it and he will be- 
come only an ordinary man.” So thinking, they 
emptied the basket onto the lire, where it burned 
tsur-tsur-tsur till it was a heap of ashes. 



THE GIRL WHO TOOK A SNAKE HUSBAND 171 

Now as it took fire, the Princess’ husband, in the 
palace ballroom, ceased dancing. “I am dizzy,” he ex- 
claimed. “Let us go into the garden that the cool air 
may revive me.” There he said to her, “My soul, I 
grow faint, and I fear this is our last hour together. 
Go and see what has befallen my snake-skin.” In 
great dread she ran to the stone house, where she 
found the basket empty and her sisters blowing the 
firfo “This is thy reward for having lied to us!” they 
cried. “Well we knew thy husband was not in truth a 
snake! But he shall boast of his magic no more.” 
And they returned to the ballroom rejoicing. 

The Princess Lukja hastened to the garden where 
she had left her husband, but she found there only 
the golden robe and the scarlet shoes that he had 
worn lying empty on the ground, and went back to 
the little house weeping a flood of salt tears. Thought 
she, “My sisters, through hatred of me, have robbed 
me of my darling forever! For I know not where in 
the white world he has gone or how to find him.” 

In the morning, however, she bethought herself of 
the Wise Woman, and went to her hut in the forest 
and told her what had occurred. Said the old dame, 
“Thy husband is in truth no man, but the son of the 
Serpent King, whose realm is in the Underworld. 
This I learned when I looked into the saucer of goat’s 



172 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

milk. His father permitted him to leave it only on 
condition that he wear his snake form by day and 
take on human form only by night. The loss of his 
scales has made this impossible, and he has been 
compelled to return to the Underworld, where he 
must face his father’s anger for wedding without his 
permission and outside the borders of his realm. 
Doubtless the Snake King will never permit him 
again to leave it.” 

When she heard this the Princess cried, “I cannot 
live without him! Tell me how to reach the Under- 
world and I will beg his father to forgive him and to 
let him return with me. I am no less a King’s daugh- 
ter than the prince is a King’s son, and why should 
he not approve of our marriage ? ” 

“By no possibility couldst thou accomplish this,” 
the Wise Woman answered. “The entrance to the 
Underworld is across nine rivers and twelve valleys, 
where the Moving Mountains open and shut each 
noon. Moreover, once there, to reach the Snake 
Kingdom thou wouldst have to pass the grandmother 
of all the Witches, beside whom the fearsomest 
Shtriga of this land is an angel from the paradises.” 

Exclaimed the Princess, “I do not fear her. Only 
set my feet on the right trail. If thou dost not I shall 
spend my life searching for it.” 



THE GIRL WHO TOOK A SNAKE HUSBAND 173 

When the old dame saw how great was her determi- 
nation and courage she said, “Well, I will aid thee 50 
far as I am able. But first return to thy house and 
sift the ashes in the fireplace. If thou canst find a 
single one of the snake scales unconsumed there may 
be a shadow of hope for thee.” 

Lukja hastened back to the palace and to the house 
in the garden and with a fine sieve sifted the ashes, 
finding, to her joy, one scale that had escaped the 
flames. With this she returned to the hut in the for- 

i 

est, where the Wise Woman gave her a little bag in 
which to carry it, hung on a cord about her neck. 
Said she, “The King of the Snake Realm is of such 
power in the Underworld that the scale will protect 
thee. Shouldst thou deem thyself in danger lay thy 
hand on the bag, and not even the old grandmother 
Shtrfga can harm thee.” 

Then she gave her food in a back-pack, and said 
she, “Go on a smooth trail, my daughter, and may 
God help thee! These are my last instructions. When 
thou beholdest the Shtriga, ask her boldly for a drink 
of water, and whatever she bids thee drink, drink it 
though it be bitter as bear’s gall, and give it praise. 
She will require thee to serve her three tasks, and 
these thou must cheerfully perform. Only have a care 
that what thou takest from her in return is of no 



174 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

value. If thou takest the gold and jewels she will 
offer thee, in the white world they will turn to twigs 
and pebbles. This is all I can tell thee.” 

The Princess thanked her, and with the pack on 
her back, set out on the trail the Wise Woman 
showed her. She walked two days, she walked four 
days, across mountains and valleys, and on the morn- 
ing of the fifth day she came to the Moving Moun- 
tains. She waited till the sun was directly overhead, 
when the sky thundered and the mountains yawned 
open, and ran straight into the chasm. Before she 
had gone a hundred steps the mountains crashed shut 
again behind her and she was in pitchy darkness, but 
seeing a glimmer of light she made toward it, and 
presently emerged into the Underworld, where the 
sun is red, the sky green, and the trees black. 

Whether she went a long way or a short way, she 
came at length to a gray stone house with a huge 
chimney, but without door or window, by which she 
knew it for the dwelling of the Witch. She was 
greatly frightened, but she went up to it and knocked 
on its stone wall. 

Instantly a dreadful sound filled the air. All around 
the black tree-leaves turned pale, the ground groaned 
and trembled, and up out of the chimney sprang the 
Shtriga, like an enormous bat. She descended the 



THE GIRL WHO TOOK A SNAKE HUSBAND 1 75 
sloping roof on all fours, with her mouth stretched 
wide, and screeched she, “Who is here? And what 
dost thou want?” 

The Princess trembled all over. She answered, “0 
Grandmother, long life to thee! I am thirsty from 
walking, and I ask of thee a cup of water.” 

Howled the old Witch, “Canst thou not see the 
spring yonder? It is cold as ice and fresh as dew and 
better than any water thou hast ever tasted.” 

Lukja went to the pool to which she pointed, and 
it was covered with a slimy green ooze and wriggling 
with white worms, so that she shut her eyes. But 
mindful of what the Wise Woman had said, she knelt 
down and took up some of the water in her hand and 
sipped it. As she did so the Shtrfga bounded down 
from the roof. “Well, is it not good? Drink more! 
Drink more!” 

The Princess replied, “O Grandmother, it is clear as 
crystal and sweet as honey, and my thirst is satisfied.” 

“Where dost thou go?” demanded the Witch. 

“I go to the Snake Realm. Of thy kindness wilt 
thou set me on my road ? ” 

“Thou art on the right trail,” replied the Shtriga. 
“But what business hast thou there? Tell me!” And 
she scrambled nearer, gritting her yellow teeth and 
curving her fingers like eagles’ claws. 



.^6 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

When she saw how the old Witch’s eyes gleamed, 
Lukja knew that danger was after her, and she put 
her hand under her coat and touched the little bag 
that held the snake scale, and immediately the 
Shtrfga turned pale and began to shiver. Said she, 
“Well, never mind what thine errand is. Thou shalt 
stay with me three days and do a task for me each 
day. If thou dost them all well, maybe I will let thee 
pass.” 

Said the Princess, “0 Grandmother, give me my 
first task now.” 

The Shtrfga scampered up the roof, leaped into the 
chimney, and presently flew back with a wooden pail. 
“Yonder in the forest,” she snarled, “is a stockade 
where I keep my wild mares. Go and fetch me a pail- 
ful of mare’s milk.” 

Lukja took the pail and went to the stockade, and 
when the wild mares saw her they thrust their heads 
over the bars, gouging the ground with their sharp 
hoofs and screaming with rage at her. But when she 
put her hand on the little bag she carried they at 
once became silent and, drooped their heads and stood 
still. Nor when she climbed the stockade did they 
harm her, so that she came back safe to the Shtrfga’s 
house with her pail of milk. 

She knocked on its wall, and ail the black trees 



THE GIRL WHO TOOK A SNAKE HUSBAND 177 
moaned and the old Witch leaped out of the chimney. 
“I have brought thy milk, Grandmother,” said she. 

The Shtrfga snatched the pail with one hand and 
seizing the Princess with the other, galloped up the 
roof and dove down the chimney with her, and as 
she did so the red sun set and everything was as dark 
as the inside of a cow. She lighted a candle, and set 
the pail in a corner. “Well, thou hast done thy first 
task,” she said, “and lucky for thee that thou didst 
finish it before sunset! For in the dark my mares 
would have tom thee in pieces.” 

Then said she, “What shall I give thee for thy 
labor?” 

Lukja replied, “Give me a bottle of the milk.” 

“That is too little!” said the old Witch. “Let it 
be rather a costly ring with a jewel in it.” 

But said the Princess, “Nay, all I want is some of 
the milk.” 

So the Shtriga, with a bad grace, filled a bottle and 
gave it to her, after which she fell on the pail, and 
thrusting her grizzled head in it, drank the milk gull- 
gull-gull to the last drop. Then she threw Lukja a 
crust of mouldy bread from the cupboard, and curling 
herself on a heap of straw, fell to snoring like a water- 
buffalo. 

Lukja ate a bit of the bread and lay down on the 



178 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

floor and went to sleep. In the morning when she 
woke the Shtrxga was broiling gristle bones over the 
fire. “Health to thee, Grandmother!” she said. 
“Didst thou sleep easily?” 

“What is that to thee?” grunted the Witch, throw- 
ing her the smallest bone. “Eat thy breakfast 
quickly, for thy task to-day is a long one.” 

When she had eaten a bit of gristle the Princess 
said, “O Grandmother, what is my task?” And the 
Shtriga told her, “In their coop behind the house is 
my golden cock with his twenty hens. Take them to 
the forest to scratch and run till sundown. Each hen 
will lay an egg. Gather the eggs and see that the wild 
hawks carry away none of the hens.” 

Giving her a basket, she seized her and leaping up 
the chimney with her, dropped her to the ground. 
“Mind thou break not a single egg!” she snarled, 
and dove down the chimney again. 

Lukja found the coop, released the cock and hfens, 
and led them into the black forest, where they ran 
hither and thither eating grubs and gnats. When a 
hen would lay an egg the golden cock would crow, 
and she would hasten to find it. When the sun was at 
high noon, and all the twenty eggs were in the 
basket, she sat down beneath a tree to rest and fell 
asleep. 



THE GIRL WHO TOOK A SNAKE HUSBAND I79 

She was awakened when the sun was low by a great 
flapping of wings, to behold a hundred fierce wild 
hawks swooping from the sky. But as they were 
about to pounce upon the hens, she touched her little 
bag, and shrieking in anger, they whirled about and 
winged away. So, with her basket of eggs, she led 
the flock back to the Witch’s house in safety. 

She shut them in their coop and knocked on the 
wall, and to the groaning of the trees the Witch shot 
up from the chimney. “I have brought back thy 
cock and hens, Grandmother,” she said. And, snarl- 
ing, the Shtrfga scrambled to the coop to count the 
hens and returning, snatched her up and plunged 
down the chimney with her, while as she did so the 
sun disappeared and the dark fell. 

She lighted the candle and set the basket of eggs in 
a comer, and said she, “Thou hast done my second 
task. Lucky for thee thou didst bring my cock and 
hens back before sundown ! For in the dark the hawks 
would have struck out thine eyes!” 

Then she asked, “What shall be thy reward?” 

“Give me one of the eggs,” Lukja answered. 

“Thy labor is worth more than that!” cried the old 
Witch. “I will give thee a golden bracelet.” 

But Lukja replied, “Nay, I will take only the 
egg-” 



180 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

So, muttering, the Shtriga gave her the egg, after 
which she took up the basket and gobbled the other 
nineteen down raw, shells and all. Then she threw the 
Princess an ear of rusty corn and stretched herself 
on her pile of straw and began to snore and snort 
like a sick horse. 

Lukja nibbled the rusty corn and lay down on the 
floor and went to sleep. In the morning she woke to 
find the Witch splitting the bones she had broiled the 
day before and roasting their marrow. “Long life to 
thee. Grandmother!” she said. “Didst thou rest well?” 

“Better than thou wilt sleep to-night,” answered 
the Shtriga, “if thou failest in thy task to-day!” And 
she licked her lips with such a glare in her yellow eyes 
that the Princess felt for her little bag, and threw her 
a bone, snarling, “Eat quickly.” 

When Lukja had sucked a little of the marrow, she 
asked, “O Grandmother, what is my task?” 

Said the Witch, “Behind the house, in their pen, 
are my silver sow and her twenty piglets. Take them 
to the forest and let them run till sundown.” So 
saying, she snatched her up, and springing up the 
chimney with her, let her drop to the ground. “Be- 
ware,” she howled, “lest the wild boars devour one 
of the young ones!” and plunged down the chimney 
again. 



When she had got her breath the Princess found 
the pen, let out the sow and her piglets, and led them 
into the forest, where they ran about rooting acorns 
and mushrooms till midafternoon, when drowsiness 
came to her and she lay down and fell asleep. 

She was awakened by a great squealing and grunt- 
ing, to behold a band of savage wild boars galloping 
upon the young pigs. But she put her hand on her 
little bag and at once they stopped their onrush and 
gnashing their tusks with rage, rushed away. So, when 
the sun was low, she brought the sow and the twenty 
piglets back to their pen. 

She knocked on the wall and the ground shook and 
groaned and the Shtrfga shot up from the chimney. 
“Thy sow and piglets are safe, Grandmother,” she 
told her. 

The Witch sped to the pen, and finding not one 
missing, flew back dancing with anger. “What of the 
wild boars?” she shrieked, grinding her teeth. “Did 
not my sharp ears hear them? How didst thou escape 
them? Tell me!” 

“Perhaps, Grandmother, the Angels helped me,” 
answered Lukja, with her hand on the little bag, and 
at that the Witch grew pale. She caught her up, 
scrambled up the roof with her, and leaped down the 
chimney just as the red sun set and thick dark fell. 



182 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

She lighted the candle, snarling, “Well, it is lucky 
for thee thou didst bring them back before sundown! 
In the dark the wild boars would have devoured thee. 
Well, what art thou to have for thy trouble?” 

“Give me three of the sow’s silver bristles,” the 
Princess said. 

“Nay,” cried the Shtriga. “They are worth 
nothing. Thou shalt have a necklace whose every link 
is a jewel.” 

But she replied, “0 Grandmother, I will take only 
the three bristles.” 

“Someone has warned thee! Someone has warned 
thee!” shrieked the old Witch, in fury. But there was 
no help for it, and she gave her the silver bristles. 
Then taking from the cupboard a maggoty cheese, 
she gobbled it down, after which she threw Lukja the 
rind, and lying down on her straw began to snore 
like the rumble of ten bullock carts. 

Lukja nibbled a bit of the rind and lay down on the 
floor, but could not sleep for hunger. At dawn the 
Shtriga suddenly ceased her snoring and the Princess, 
knowing that she had awakened, lay very still. The 
Witch came from her straw pile on all fours and 
sniffed about her. “She has done my three tasks,” 
she croaked to herself, “but nevertheless I must eat 
her, for never have I been so hungry. How tender 



THE GIRL WHO TOOK A SNAKE HUSBAND 1 83 
she will be!” And she felt her with her skinny hands. 

At her touch Lukja grasped the little bag and 
pressed it, so that the Shtriga bounded into the air, 
howling. Three times the Witch rushed upon her, but 
each time the Princess pressed the bag, harder and 
harder, till at last, with a dreadful shriek, the Shtriga 
left her, and bounding up the chimney, fled from 
the place as if wolves were after her. 

Then Lukja went to the cupboard, put all the 
bread and meat she found there into her girdle, and 
climbing the chimney, took the trail through the 
forest. 

Whether she went a long way or a short way, at 
last she came to the forest’s end, to a great plain 
where there were no more black trees but only bushes 
covered with yellow berries. It was alive with spotted 
snakes, by which she knew it for the Snake Realm. 
But with the little bag in her hand she went on 
without fear till she came to the Snake Capital and 
to the palace of the Snake King. Its gateway was 
guarded by soldiers dressed in spotted robes, with 
arms in their hands, and they were all weeping and 
moaning, so that the air was full of their lamentation. 

She asked them, “Why do ye mourn?” 

They answered, “Our King is stricken with deaf- 
ness, and our Queen has lost the power of speech, and 



I84 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

their son, the Prince Royal, has become blind.” 

Said she, “Is there nothing that can cure them?” 

They replied, “Only one thing can bring back the 
King’s hearing, and that is the ashes from the bristles 
of a silver sow. The Queen’s speech can be restored 
only when she eats the egg of a golden hen. Only the 
milk of a wild mare can cure the Prince Royal’s 
sight. But in this realm never have there been known 
either silver sows, golden hens, or wild mares.” 

“What if I can cure them?” asked Lukja. And 
they answered, “Do so, and nothing thou couldst ask 
would be too great a reward.” 

Said she, “Take me to them.” 

They took her then into the palace, and lo, there 
sat the Snake King on his throne as deaf as a stone, 
with his ministers shouting into his ear without his 
being able to hear a word. She bade them fetch her a 
silver plate, and when it was brought, she took from 
her girdle the three bristles the Witch had given her 
and burned them on it. She touched the ash to his 
ears, and instantly he said, “I hear the bumbulltm of 
the summer thunder!” She touched it to them again, 
and he exclaimed, “I hear folk speaking words!” She 
did so a third time, when he cried, “I hear the sound 
of an ant crawling on the wall!” 

Seeing that his hearing was restored, and better 



THE GIRL WHO TOOK A SNAKE HUSBAND 1 85 
than it had ever been, all shouted with joy, and he 
said to the Princess, “Who art thou, who hast done 
this miracle for me?” 

She answered, “0 King’s Majesty, I am a King’s 
daughter from the white world who has come to aid 
thee.” Exclaimed he, “Thou shalt have as great a 
gift of gold as thou canst carry! Would that thou 
couldst as easily restore the Queen’s speech.” 

“That also I will do,” she told him. “Take me to 
her.” 

The King sprang up and took her to the Queen’s 
room, where she sat with her women about her, grasp- 
ing their sleeves and moving her lips, while no sound 
came from them. Lukja bade them fetch a pan of 
burning charcoal and a pot of water, and boiled the 
egg the grandmother Shtrfga had given her and made 
the Queen eat it. The Queen took one mouthful and 
began to cluck like a hen. She took a second and 
crowed like a cock. She took a third and spoke, say- 
ing, “How long it is since I have been able to speak! ” 

Seeing that she could now speak as well as ever 
she could, all her women rejoiced, and the King said, 
“O Princess, thou shalt go back to the white world 
with a gift of jewels such as no princess there has ever 
beheld! But would that thy skill could reach the case 
of our son, the Prince Royal!” 



l86 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

Said she, “Let me see him.” 

So the King and Queen took her to the Prince’s 
chamber, where he sat in grieving and melancholy, 
and when she saw his sightless eyes the tears ran 
down her face. She bade a silver bowl be brought, and 
poured out the mare’s milk the Witch had given her, 
and dipping her kerchief into it, wetted the Prince’s 
eyes therewith. She stroked them once and he said, 
“I see shadows moving!” She stroked them again, 
and he exclaimed, “O my father and my mother! Is 
it you, indeed, that I see?” She stroked them a third 
time, and he knew her face and fainted from joy. 

They rubbed his hands and feet, and seeing him 
coming to, the King said, “0 Princess, I shall send 
thee back to the white world with any gift thou 
mayest ask that is in my giving!” 

At that the Prince opened his eyes, and sprang up 
and embraced her, calling her by all sweet names, so 
that the King exclaimed, “What means this?” 

He replied, “0 my father, this is none other than 
my wife, whom I wedded without thy permission in 
the white world. Forgive us both, for without her 
even my eyes cannot comfort me!” 

Said she, then, “O King’s Majesty, he speaks 
truly. He is my husband, and I hold thee to thy 
royal word. I would take back with me to the white 



THE GIRL WHO TOOK A SNAKE HUSBAND 1 8 7 
world neither gold nor jewels, but him, my husband, 
as my reward.” 

Said the Queen, “She has indeed earned it, and a 
king’s promise is not to be broken like a stone.” 

Then Lukja told them her story, and the King 
agreed, saying, “Well, if it must be so! My second 
son shall inherit my kingship and rule after me, but 
thy husband shall return with thee, as his heart in- 
clines, and shall go no more in snake form forever.” 

And after he had feasted them for a month he sent 
them back, through the Moving Mountains, to the 
white world, and they went to her father’s realm, 
where in time he ruled in the King’s place. As for the 
Princess’ two jealous sisters, they were so eaten with 
envy that they never showed their faces in the palace 
again. 

Take this tale for your daughters and heirs. 

Health he to us, and our sons, and theirs! 






THE BOY WHO PLAYED THE BOUSOUKA 




THE BOY WHO PLAYED THE BOUSOUKA 


a JCE AND ONCE, on a day of a year, in a 
town beyond mountains and rivers, there was 
a poor lad named Qerim, who had neither father nor 
mother nor near relations, and wandered homeless in 
the streets, finding his bread wherever folk gave it 
to him. When twelve years had gone over the tops 

of the mountains he saw one day sitting by the road- 

191 


192 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

side a Gheg, a man of the mountains, who was draw- 
ing forth sweet music from an instrument shaped like 
a long wooden spoon, with three strings which he 
struck with an eagle’s quill, and he stopped to listen. 

When the man put by his instrument, Qerim asked 
him, “What is the thing thou art playing called?” 

The man answered, “It is called a bousouka.” 

Said Qerim then, “Is it hard to play?” 

“Not with a teacher,” the man replied. “I am the 
best teacher in this land, and if I could find anyone 
to trade it to, I could teach him to play it in an 
hour.” 

When he heard this, Qerim hung his head, for he 
had fallen in love with the music, and thought he 
would rather have the bousouka than anything in 
the white world. “Alas!” he said. “I have nothing 
I could trade for it. I am a poor boy, and the only 
thing I have is my name.” 

“That is better than nothing,” said the man, “and 
I have always wanted a name, for I have never had 
one. Give me thine and take my bousouka.” 

“But what should I do without a name?” cried 
Qerim. 

“I have got along very well with none,” the man 
replied, “although at times it is somewhat awkward. 



THE BOY WHO PLAYED THE BOUSOUKA I93 
However, I dare say I shall find someone with a name 
he can get along without.” And he rose and tying the 
bousouka to his girdle, set off along the road. 

But when Qerim saw him about to vanish, he ran 
after him and said he, “I will trade with thee. My 
name is Qerim, and thou canst have it for thy bou- 
souka.” So the man gave him the instrument and sat 
down with him by the roadside and spent an hour 
teaching him to play it, after which he bade him fare- 
well and went his way. 

Qerim went back along the street playing his bou- 
souka, and so sweetly he played that everyone 
stopped to hear him. When they called him by name, 
he said, “I am no longer Qerim. I have traded my 
name for this bousouka.” After that they called him 
“Boy,” and people far and near knew him as The- 
Foy-Who-Plays-the-Bousouka. So he grew till he was 
sixteen, caring for nothing but his playing, practising 
all day long, determined that he would play better 
than anyone else in a hundred valleys, and in the end 
he became so skillful that flying birds would alight 
on the nearest tree and cats would stop catching mice 
to hear it. 

One day the Boy crossed the mountain to the sea- 
shore and sat down there to play. There was a ship 



194 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

near by loading faggots, and the sailormen, when they 
heard the music, stood stock-still, with their burdens 
on their shoulders and their ears turned toward the 
sound. So the Captain cried out to them, “One of 
you go and see who plays so sweetly and bring him 
here. He shall play while you work and I will pay him 
whatever he asks.” 

One of the sailormen went and brought the Boy 
and when he had played his bousouka till the loading 
was finished, the Captain asked him, “How much 
shall I pay thee?” 

The Boy replied, “I desire no money, but I would 
have passage on thy ship to whatever port it is 
bound.” 

Said the Captain, “That is easy.” 

So the Boy boarded the ship, and every day while 
the sailormen worked the sails and the helm, he 
played for them, till they came to their port at the 
other side of the sea. 

Now the King of that city had an only daughter, 
the Princess Zina, as beautiful as the moon shining 
through a silver cloud, and he was troubled ofi her 
account for the reason that she refused to take a 
husband, though many princes, sons of other kings 
round about, desired her. Always she said, “0 my 
father, do not compel me. For I will marry only one 



THE BOY WHO PLAYED THE BOUSOUKA 1 95 
who happens to please me, though I take no husband 
even till I am thirty years old.” 

The palace overlooked the dock where the ship lay, 
and one evening the Princess, sitting on her bal- 
cony, heard the music of the bousouka and was 
charmed by it. She called the King and made him 
listen, and said she, “0 my father! I wish to have for 
husband none other than the player. I care not if he 
be blind or a hunchback, or whether he be rich or a 
beggar. I will marry only him.” 

Said the King, “This bousouka player cannot be of 
noble blood, or have a noble name. And a royal prin- 
cess cannot take to husband a man with a common 
name.” 

But she answered, “It is not possible that one who 
plays such music is an ordinary man! Nor will I be- 
lieve he has a common name till I hear him pronounce 
it with his own lips.” 

Said her father, “Very well, thou shalt hear it 
from his own lips.” 

Then she asked him, “If he has not a common 
name, may I have him for husband ? ” 

And the King, thinking this incredible, replied, 
“On that one condition, I consent.” 

So straightway he sent a company of his troops, 
who boarded the ship and said to the Captain, “Our 



I96 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

King demands that thou give up to him thy bou- 
souka player, whom we are ordered to bring to the 
palace.” 

When he heard this the Captain was alarmed for 
the Boy’s safety, for he had begun to love him as if 
he were his own son. Said he, “He is a passenger on 
my ship and has done no wrong. Why should the 
King demand him?” The soldiers, however, an- 
swered, “The King’s word must be obeyed. But have 
no fear, for no harm shall come to him.” So the Cap- 
tain delivered the Boy to them and sailed away in his 
ship, wishing him all luck. 

Now the King’s audience chamber had a secret 
lattice through which his daughter might observe 
whoever came before him, and when she saw the 
Boy’s good looks and graceful bearing she fell deep 
as the deep ocean in love with him. 

Said the King, when he bowed before him, “What 
is thy name?” 

The Boy replied, “O King’s Majesty! I have no 
name.” 

Cried the King, “Who ever heard of a person with 
no name? What art thou called, then?” 

He answered, “lam called only ‘Boy/ ” 

When he heard this, the King’s face turned black 
with anger, for one who has no name at all cannot 



THE BOY WHO PLAYED THE BOUSOUKA I97 
have a common one, and he regretted the promise he 
had made to his daughter now that there was no 
help for it. But the Princess laughed aloud with joy, 
and running from behind the lattice, took the Boy 
by the hand, saying, “Glory to thy mouth that says 
it! I have chosen thee to be my husband, and have 
my father’s royal consent. How is it with thee? Hast 
thou a wife already?” 

When the Boy looked at her and saw how sur- 
passingly lovely she was, he hung his head speechless 
with delight, till the King said, “Hast thou a bone 
in thy tongue?” Then he replied to the girl, “My 
heart is thine to walk on! I have no wife, but I am 
poor, without land or possessions.” 

Said she, “I have a plenty for us both.” 

But the Boy was prideful — as are all the mountain 
men — and seeing the anger in the King’s face, he 
answered, “May thy soul sing! I will be joyful to 
marry thee, but after we are wedded thou shalt of 
thine own will go with me to mine own land.” 

Said she, “Wherever thy feet lead, mine will fol- 
low.” 

So on the third day they were married and lived 
together in all satisfaction. Every day he played to 
her on his bousouka and every day she loved him the 
more, till two months had gone by, when he said to 



98 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

er, “My love, it is time for us to depart to my own 
tome. The ship on which I came to this place is 
i g ain lying at the wharf on her return voyage, and I 
im minded to sail in her.” 

She replied, “O my golden husband, let us go. And 
nay our path be smooth to thy Land-of-the-Eagle.” 
\nd she went to the King and told him. 

Said he, “Tell him I will send with you many 
soldiers and a great sum of gold.” But the Boy, in his 
pride, bade her say to her father that he had need of 
neither men nor money. The King, however, gave to 
her a little casket that locked with a silver key, con- 
taining three jewels as big as larks’ eggs, one red, one 
blue, and one yellow, saying, “Take with you these, 
my daughter. They are magic stones, such as are 
given as gifts to Kings, which if a thief steals them 
will cry and sob till they are restored to their right- 
ful owner. Since they are of great value, if thou or 
thy husband come to need in his land, thou mayest 
sell them and turn the black day to white.” 

So when they had made their farewells, the Boy 
took her to the ship, which was about to hoist its 
sails to depart, and all the sailormen when they saw 
him, with his bousouka and a bride as beautiful as 
a pomegranate flower, welcomed them with joy, and 
the Captain said, “Not so much as a silver piece 



THE BOY WHO PLAYED THE BOUSOUKA I99 
shalt thou pay for passage — only play for us now and 
then on thy bousouka!” 

They sailed thus across the sea till they came to 
the very spot where the ship had loaded its fa gg ots 
and where he had first played to the sailormen, and 
there they landed, while the ship continued on her 
way. 

Asked the Princess, “ Is this thy land, and are we 
near thy home ? ” 

Then the Boy said to himself, “Alas! My pride has 
led me astray. Though the town on the other side of 
the mountain is my home, yet how can I take her 
there? As for a house, I have not two sticks one atop 
another. Nor have I a trade, and one cannot live on 
well-water.” But he could not yet bring himself to tell 
her the truth, so he answered, “No, my home is still 
further. When the sun’s heat is past we shall start. 
Meanwhile, yonder is a hut such as the gypsies use in 
winter; let us rest awhile in it.” 

They entered it, and the Princess lay down on a 
pile of boughs in its corner and presently drowsiness 
overcame her and she fell asleep. As she slept, he 
remembered the little casket she had brought with 
her, and thinking, “Perhaps it holds some trinket 
that I can sell for our food, while I am seeking a 
decent place in which we can stay,” he took the 



200 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

silver key from her girdle, carefully lest he awaken 
her, and carried the box outside the hut and opened it. 
But as he sat looking at the three jewels it con- 



tained an eagle swooped down from the sky and 
snatched them in its talons and flew away. And the 
Boy ran after it, saying to himself, "I should never 
have opened my darling’s box! If I do not get them 
back she will have the right to hate me forever!” 



THE BOY WHO PLAYED THE BOUSOUKA 201 

He ran till the hut was far behind him and he was 
as breathless as a crushed frog, till he beheld the eagle 
soar away over the sea, when he fell on the sand 
weeping salt tears and bemoaning his misfortune. 

Now in those days companies of bandits haunted 
the coast of that region, who used to steal folk away 
and carry them to some northern land to be sold as 
slaves, and by the will of Heaven a band of these fell 
upon the Boy while he lay lamenting, and tied him 
upon a horse and carried him to a far country where 
they sold him in service to a merchant. 

There he labored for his master many months with- 
out hope of escape, grieving for his wife, whom he had 
left alone and helpless on the seashore of his own 
country. His master was kind to him, and one day, 
seeing him sitting in melancholy, said to him, “What 
can I get thee to make thee happier?” 

He replied, “I am a player of the instrument 
which is called the bousouka. If I had one, perhaps 
its music would comfort my loneliness.” 

The merchant procured one, therefore, and every 
day the Boy would play on it, while he prayed un- 
ceasingly to God and the Angels to protect his wife 
and bring them together again. 

Now on a day his master said to him, “To-morrow 
I shall take thee to an island I own which is a barren 



202 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

rock in the midst of the sea. Thou hast been a faithful 
servant to me, and if thou canst make of it a vine- 
yard thou shalt have thy liberty and sufficient money 
besides to take thee to thine own country.” Next day, 
accordingly, he put provisions and seeds and iron 
picks and hoes aboard' a ship and they sailed to the 
island, the Boy taking with him his beloved bou- 
souka. 

When they came there and the Boy saw that the 
place was uninhabited save for wild foxes, covered 
with stones and sparse bushes and with a single grove 
of pine trees in its center, he said to the merchant, 
“Why are there no people here?” 

His master answered, “Folk fear to live here, for 
it is said to be a resort of the Ora, and the pine grove 
is their meeting place.” 

Now the Ora are usually invisible but appear to 
those to whom they are friendly, sometimes in the 
form of children in floating dresses of white mist, and 
sometimes as women more lovely than any human 
women and with footfalls that make no sound at all. 
In the Land-of-the-Eagle there were many forests 
where the Ora came together, and might be heard 
calling to one another at night, telling things des- 
tined to happen, of battles that would be fought, and 
of good or evil fortune that was to befall. So the Boy 



THE BOY WHO PLAYED THE BOUSOUKA 203 
said to his master, “I do not fear the Ora. In my own 
country I have sometimes heard them speak.” And 
he thought, “I will play my bousouka to them, and 
perhaps the music will please them.” 

When the merchant had unloaded the seed and the 
tools and provisions he had brought — olives and 
cheeses, and corn meal and dried meat — he sailed 
away home, and the Boy set about his task. First he 
began to clear the island of its stones, which he threw 
into the sea, but the work was hard and when he saw 
how small was his progress he was disheartened. At 
such times, of an evening, he would sit in the pine 
grove playing his bousouka, and one night he thought 
he heard, mingling with the notes, the sound of a 
faint sobbing, like the voice of a little child crying in 
the distance. As he listened it seemed to come from 
above his head. 

When daylight broke he saw in the top of the tallest 
pine tree the nest of an eagle. “It cannot be possible,” 
he thought, “that there is a child there, but neverthe- 
less I will see.” So he climbed the tree and behold, in 
the nest with the young eaglets lay the three jewels 
the eagle had snatched from him in his own country 
on the day the bandits carried him off, and the sob- 
bing he had heard came from them. As soon as he 
put his hand on them, however, they became silent. 



ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 


204 

so that he wondered whether they had really cried 
or he had only fancied it. 

He counted his recovery of the jewels a good sign, 
but as the days went by longing for his wife weighed 
heavy upon him. Often now, as he played of an eve- 
ning, he knew the Ora were listening, and sometimes 
he would see shapes like white mist flitting by, and 
hear thin voices whispering together. And he would 
think, “Would the Ora might tell me that I would 
find her!” 

One night when for grieving he could not eat his 
supper, as he sat in the grove he heard a voice behind 
him say, “0 my silver sisters! The toiler is very sad. 
Can we not comfort him?” And another voice at a 
distance answered, “He sorrows for the Princess 
Zina.” “Shall he sorrow long?” asked the first, and 
the other replied, “Not long.” 

At this the Boy was so overjoyed that he took up 
his bousouka again and did not leave off playing till 
the moon was near to setting. When at last he put it 
by there were white shapes dancing about him in a 
circle, and as they danced, a voice said, “He has 
pleased us for many nights with his music. Should he 
not have his reward?” Another voice answered, “He 
would have that if he knew the charm that commands 
the old gray snake with poison in its tooth that 



THE BOY WHO PLAYED THE BOUSOUKA 20 5 
guards the island’s ancient treasure.” Said a third 
voice, “Sisters, let us recite it.” Then he heard many 
voices repeating together these words: 

“ Snake before my treasure-door. 

Guard it, guard it, evermore! 

Till a man without a name 

Drive a wild fox and a tame 

Round about, round about, round about” 

When they had recited these words three times in 
unison, the white shapes faded and he saw them no 
more. 

Said he to himself, “There is a treasure on this 
island that has been hidden of old time. I am the man 
without a name for whom fate intends it, and the 
Ora have given me the spell that has been laid on it!” 
And he said the lines over and over to himself till he 
had nailed them with an iron nail to the wall of his 
memory. 

Then he thought, “I must first find the treasure’s 
guardian,” and when morning broke he went all about 
the island searching for the gray snake. Nine days he 
spent thus, and on the tenth he came upon a flat 
slab of bare rock on which a huge snake, five times his 
own length, lay in coil, sunning itself, which when it 



206 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

saw him, reared itself, hissing like a hundred geese, 
and gliding into a hole beneath the rock slab, disap- 
peared. 

By this the Boy knew that the treasure was be- 
neath the rock, and that the snake was the master of 
its spell. Accordingly, he made a fox trap, and baited 
and set it, and when he had caught a fox cub, he fell 
to taming it, feeding it with his own hand and petting 
and fondling it till it was as tame as a puppy. Lastly 
he caught a wild fox and tethered the pair together 
and drove them three times around the rock that held 
the treasure, and at the third time the huge snake 
leaped from its hole and darted away in the under- 
brush. 

Then the Boy took his pick and prized up the rock, 
and beneath it was a deep dry well, filled to the very 
brim with gold ducats — enough to load a ship! 

When he saw this vast wealth, he said to himself, 
“Here am I with the lost jewels again, and with a 
shipload of gold, if I only had a means of taking it 
away. Surely the Ora were right and I shall find my 
wife also!” 

That night, as he lay sleeping, he heard a voice 
say, “Play thy bousouka!” So he took the instrument 
and began to play. 

Now at the moment a ship filled with soldiers was 



THE BOY WHO PLAYED THE BOUSOUKA 207 
passing the island, and the breeze bore the sound to 
them. It was so beautiful that they reefed the sails 
and let down the anchor to listen, and when the 
morning came their captain said, “Let us go ashore 
and see what can have made the music, for this 
island has always been uninhabited.” 

When they found the Boy sitting alone in the pine 
grove the Captain asked him, “What dost thou here?” 

“My master has commanded me to make of this 
island a vineyard,” he replied. 

Said they, “That will take thee, single-handed, till 
thy hair is white.” 

He answered, “Stone by stone makes the tower; 
grain by grain makes the loaf. Little by little I shall 
do it.” 

“Better come with us,” they urged him, but he 
shook his head. 

“Then,” said the Captain, “as we cannot bear to 
leave thy bousouka music, we will stay and help thee 
with thy work, and each evening thou shalt play for 
us.” 

The Boy joyfully agreed, and captain and soldiers 
and sailormen remained there three months, till they 
had made of the barren island a fertile vineyard 
lovely to behold. Then they bade him farewell and 
sailed away. 



208 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

Soon after the merchant came in his ship, bringing 
more provisions for the Boy’s labor, and when he saw 
how the whole island had been cleared and planted, 
he thought his eyes were two liars. He embraced the 
Boy and said he, “Thou hast done more than well, 
and I shall reward thee.” Then he bade his sailormen 
turn the ship about for her return. 

When they came in the ship to the city where the 
merchant lived, he said to the Boy, “In return for 
making my vineyard thou shalt have thy liberty. 
What more can I give thee for a gift? Ask whatever 
thou wilt.” 

He answered, “I would have a ship to return to 
my own land, and since salt is cheap here, I will take 
a load of it.” 

Said the merchant, “That is a small gift and thou 
hast earned it forty times.” And he gave him the 
ship and her cargo, and twenty men to sail her, 
bound to his service for a year. 

Then said the Boy, “Put aboard a thousand young 
grapevines, and as my way lies past thy island vine- 
yard, I will stop and plant them there.” This the 
merchant gladly did and the Boy bade him farewell 
and set sail. * 

When he came to the island he ordered his sailor- 
men to set out the vines, which they did in ten days, 



THE BOY WHO PLAYED THE BOUSOUKA 20g 
and each night, while they slept, he brought a tenth 
of the gold pieces from the hidden well and concealed 
them beneath the salt in the vessel’s hold, till the last 
of the hoard was aboard her. Then he set sail for the 
mainland, where at every port he cast anchor and 
went about the city playing his bousouka. For he 1 
said to himself, “If my wife is here, she will hear it 
and will know my music. For no one has ever played 
the bousouka as I do.” 

So it was with him. But as for his wife, the Princess 
Zina, it must be told that when she awoke in the 
gypsies’ hut on the seashore and found her husband 
gone and the jewels missing, she said to herself, “How 
can he have done this?” And she spent the rest of the 
day and the whole night weeping. Then she thought, 
“I cannot believe that he I so love can be a villain! 
What has happened I cannot imagine, but I will 
search the whole white world over till I find him.” 

So she set out along the seashore, with a broken 
branch for a staff, begging her bread as she went, and 
so lovely was she that all who saw her pitied her and 
the peasant who had but two handfuls of com meal 
gave her one. But not one of whom she asked could 
tell her of a bousouka player. 

However, the story of the lovely beggar and her 
search traveled far across the mountains and the sea, 



210 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

and finally it reached the King, her father. He had 
wondered that no news had come from her, and had 
been able to think of nothing but her absence, for 
where the tooth aches, there the tongue will go. When 
he heard the tale he sprang up from his throne crying, 
“She is none other than my daughter! The scoundrel 
she married has deserted her, and if I find him I will 
kill him!” And he sent letters to all the Kings of the 
countries round about reciting her plight and praying 
that if a wandering bousouka player were found in 
their dominions, he should straightway be put to 
death. 

Thus it came about that on a day when the Boy 
sat in the market-place of a certain port playing his 
bousouka, with his ship at the dock, there came sol- 
diers who seized him and dragged him before the 
Chief Magistrate. 

This man was cruel and dishonest, and when the 
Boy was brought before him he sent his officers away 
and said to him cunningly, “Thou hast already been 
sentenced to be hanged, but thou canst buy thy life 
for a price. What wilt thou give for it?” 

Now the three jewels the Boy had sewn into the 
hem of his coat, and thinking, “I can more than 
make up to my wife for them with the gold I have in 
my ship,” he took them out and said he, “Thou shalt 



THE BOY WHO PLAYED THE BOUSOUKA 21 1 
have these.” But when the Chief Magistrate saw their 
size and value he nearly lost his eyebrows in his as- 
tonishment. He snatched them from the Boy and 
calling his officers, bade them beat him and throw 
him into a windowless dungeon till the next noon, 
when he should be hanged in the square. 

The jewels the Magistrate put in his girdle, but no 
sooner had the Boy been dragged away than they 
began to cry. At first he thought it was a cat, and 
looked in the corners and under the table, but could 
find nothing bigger than a louse, and at last he real- 
ized that the sobbing came from the stones them- 
selves. He took them out, petting and caressing them 
and holding them to his cheek, but they cried the 
louder. He dared not hide them anywhere for fear 
someone should find them, and at length he wrapped 
them in an old turban to smother the sound of their 
sobs, and put the turban into his breast. 

Now the Princess Zina by the decree of fate came 
the next morning to that very city, and seeing a 
crowd in the Square she asked a bystander, saying, 
“Mayest thou live long! Why are the people gathered 
yonder?” 

He replied, “And to thee long life! A man is to be 
hanged there at noon.” 

Said she, “Is he a robber or a murderer?” 



212 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

He answered, “No. It is said that he deserted his 
wife.” 

“In this country is a man hanged, then, for desert- 
ing his wife?” 

“No,” he replied, “but she was the daughter of 
some King or other.” 

At this the Princess began to tremble. “Who and 
what is he?” she asked. 

“Why,” said he, “he is a bousouka player, and 
they say that he has no name.” 

When she heard this she cried out and ran to the 
palace and beat with her hands on its gate, shouting 
that she must speak with the King. But the guard, 
counting her only a beggar woman in a tattered robe, 
drove her away with whips, till at last she dragged 
herself weeping to the square again, praying to God 
and the Angels to help her. 

It happened that the King, looking out of the pal- 
ace window, called his Prime Minister and asked him, 
“Is it a holiday, that so great a throng have gath- 
ered?” 

“No, O Majesty,” the Prime Minister replied. 
“The man they call the bousouka player is about to 
be hanged there.” 

Now the King was in good spirits that morning, 
and said he, “Glory to thy mouth! That will be 



THE BOY WHO PLAYED THE BOUSOUKA 213 
amusing to see!” And he ordered the royal carriage 
to be brought and sent a messenger to command that 
the execution be delayed until he arrived. 

So, at noon, the door of the prison opened and the 
soldiers marched out with the Boy, bruised and bleed- 
ing from his beating, and weeping to think that never 
in this life would he see his wife again; and they 
brought him to the gallows where the Chief Magis- 
trate was sitting, and put the rope around his neck. 
Presently the King arrived, and the Chief Magistrate 
got down from his great chair and the King sat in it. 
And the hangman bowed before the King, waiting 
his word. 

When the Princess Zina saw the King himself there, 
she burst through the ring of soldiers and threw her- 
self at his feet, crying, “O King’s Majesty! Spare this 
man, for he has done no wrong!” The watching 
people, hearing, raised a loud shout, for they had 
loved the Boy’s music and were sad to behold him 
in such a plight; and as for him, his joy at seeing her, 
even as a beggar, was so great that he fell down 
and almost choked himself to death with the noose 
that was about his neck. 

Demanded the King of her, “Who art thou?” 

She replied, “I am his wife.” 

The Chief Magistrate said, “Do not listen to her. 



214 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

This man’s wife was a King’s daughter, and this wo- 
man is only a crazy beggar.” 

But the Princess cried, “I am that same King’s 
daughter and no other.” 

Then the King bade her tell him her tale, and she 
told how her father had given her the three magic 
jewels, that she might sell them if she and her hus- 
band met with necessity in his own land, and how 
she had waked in the gypsies’ hut to find them gone. 

When she had related thus far, the King turned to 
the Boy and asked him, “Didst thou steal them and 
desert thy wife there?” 

Answered the Boy, “No.” And he told his tale up 
to the day he had found the stones again by their 
crying in the eagle’s nest on the merchant’s island, 
when the King exclaimed, “How wondrous those 
jewels that have the power to cry! Would I could see 
them! What did they sound like?” The Princess re- 
plied, “Like the little child we hear sobbing now.” 

The King looked about him, for he had been hear- 
ing the same sound out of one ear for some time, and 
he cried in a loud voice, “Whoever has that crying 
child, bring it here to me!” But there was no child to 
be seen. 

Now the Chief Magistrate knew the sobbing came 
from the three stolen jewels hidden in the turban in 



THE BOY WHO PLAYED THE BOUSOUKA 215 
his breast, and he was afraid. Said he, “O Majesty, 
I will find the child for thee.” And he would have lost 
himself in the crowd, but the King said, “Come 
hither!” 

The Chief Magistrate came trembling, and every 
step he took the crying sounded louder, till the King 
exclaimed, “It is thou thyself who hast the child 
about thee!” He bade the soldiers search him, and 
finding the turban in his breast they unrolled it and 
there were the jewels. 

When the King saw them his eyes flashed black 
fire. He asked the Chief Magistrate, “Whence hadst 
thou these?” And the Boy answered for him, “I have 
carried them this year past in the hem of my coat, 
till he took them from me and gave me a beating in 
return.” 

Said the King, “Give them to her,” and the in- 
stant the Princess took the stones in her hands their 
sobbing ceased. 

Then said the King, “Your stories are true, in- 
deed!” And he commanded that the Boy be released 
and that royal carriages be brought to carry them 
both to the palace with him as his royal guests. 

When they heard this, all the people shouted for 
gladness. Only the hangman said, “O Majesty, I pre- 
sume, then, we shall have no hanging to-day.” Said 



2l6 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

the King, “ There is no reason to disappoint the 
people.” And he bade them hang the Chief Magis- 
trate in the Boy’s place. 

So that was done straightway, and the Boy and the 
Princess Zina remained one month, they remained 
two months and three months, in that capital, where 
the King feasted them every day. He sent his soldiers 
to fetch the gold from the Boy’s ship — and it was a 
very great treasure, sufficient to purchase all that the 
soul could desire — and at the end of their stay he 
commanded his army to conduct them, with the gold, 
to the land of her father. 

He received them with all joy and adopted the Boy 
as his son, and there they lived out their lives in 
happiness. And in time the Boy ruled in his stead. 
Every day he played his bousouka, and his wife had 
the three jewels set in his golden crown, and they 
never cried again. 

There was I to eat the cake and drink the good wine . 
Now Fve told thee my tale, tell thou me thine! 



THE PRINCESS WHO HAD THE SILVER 
TOOTH 





THE PRINCESS WHO HAD THE SILVER 
TOOTH 

W HETHER it is true or not, whether you believe 
it or not, may the telling and the hearing bring 
us good luck. Well, then! 

There were two neighbor Kings named Pjeter and 
Marko who ruled their lands in such friendship that 
an enemy of one was an enemy of the other, and King 
Pjeter had no son, but three motherless daughters, 
for whom he had not as yet chosen husbands. 

Now King Marko, his friend, fell out with the 


219 



220 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

ruler of another land who declared war against him. 
Accordingly, King Marko sent a letter to King 
Pjeter, which said: 

O my Brother-in-Rule, long life to thee! This is to tell 
thee that an army marches against my border intent on 
wasting my realm, and by reason of our close friendship 
I pray thine aid. A good friend is a gate to Paradise. 
Come to me with thy good sword and wise counsel and 
God will give us the victory. 

When King Pjeter read this letter he was greatly 
disturbed. Said he to himself, "While this is not my 
quarrel, I am beholden to King Marko and am bound 
to help him, Yet I am old, and if I lose my life in the 
war what will become of my three daughters ? ” 

Now he had three thrones, one of gold on which he 
sat when he was joyful, one of silver which he used 
when he was neither happy nor unhappy, and one of 
iron for days when he was sad; and finding him 
seated on the iron throne, his oldest daughter said to 
him, “0 my father! Why art thou cast down? Has 
something happened to grieve thee?” 

He answered, "How shall I tell thee, my child! 
King Marko goes to war and has called on me to come 
with him to battle. Would that I had a son, who 
could take my place in this!” 



PRINCESS WHO HAD THE SILVER TOOTH 221 

Said she, “It is true that I am a girl, but thou hast 
taught us three daughters all manly sports, such as 
horsemanship, and sword play and throwing the 
spear. Why should I not do as thy son would do? 
Give me armor and weapons and thou shalt see.” 

Said he, “That is impossible. War is for men, not 
women.” She urged him, however, night and day, 
giving him no rest, till at last he consented, and gave 
her armor with a sword and a horse to ride, and she 
set out to the war. 

To test her courage he took the skin of a huge wolf 
and went in advance to a mountain ravine through 
which she must pass, where he put on the skin and 
sprang out upon her, so that she cried out in fear, 
and dropping her sword, wheeled her horse and gal- 
loped back, nor did she draw rein till she came to the 
palace. There, in shame, she took to her bed, and, 
when King Pjeter returned, she said to him, “Alas! 
I had gone but a league when my horse took fright 
and threw me and sprained my ankle, so that I can- 
not fight in thy place!” 

He replied, “Sorrow not, my daughter. Thy desire 
shows thy good heart.” And he took seat again on 
his iron throne. 

Then his second daughter came to him, and seeing 
him there, said to him, “0 my father! What weighs 



222 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

upon thee? Has something happened to make thee 

melancholy?” 

He replied, “0 my child, how shall I tell thee! King 
Marko is attacked by his enemy and has summoned 
me to join him in the war. Would that I had a son 
to go in my stead!” 

Said she, “I am a girl, but why should I not go? 
For I am strong and know the use of arms. Let me 
play the part of a son.” 

But he shook his head. “Fighting is man’s trade,” 
he said, “and a woman is no warrior.” 

However, she would not take no for an answer, 
and urged him so continually that in the end he 
agreed, and gave her a horse and armor and a sword, 
and she departed for the fray. But he took the hide 
of a 'great wild boar, and going in advance to the 
mountain ravine, leaped out upon her in it, so that 
she screamed in terror and throwing away her sword, 
galloped back to the palace. There she, too, took to 
her bed in shame, and when the King, returning, 
came to her, she said, “O my father! I had gone but 
a league when such a sickness seized me that I fear 
the tear of a Shtoyzavalle has fallen on my head!” 

Now, as all know, the Shtoyzavalle are the Angels 
who, when Lucifer the Archangel rebelled against 
God, took neither side in the battle, and so cannot 



PRINCESS WHO HAD THE SILVER TOOTH 223 
enter Paradise, but must remain in the air. They weep 
continually, and if the tear of one of them falls on 
a man or a woman it causes an illness like sunstroke. 

The King answered, "Grieve not, my daughter, but 
rest and thou wilt soon be well. Thy desire shows thy 
good heart.” And he returned to his iron throne. 

Lastly his youngest daughter, who was named 
Theodora, came to him. She was the loveliest of the 
three — so beautiful that there was none to compare 
with her in all the lands beyond the mountains. She 
had for playmate a little dog named Noi'teshe, with 
a shaggy brown coat, which could not only dance, 
but could speak, and which went with her every- 
where. When she saw King Pjeter was sitting on his 
iron throne, she said, “0 my father! Thou art in 
sorrow. What saddens thee?” 

He replied, "How shall I tell thee! King Marko 
faces a foe who comes against him with a great army, 
and he desires me to assist him. Would thou wert a 
son, to go instead!” 

Said she, "1 am a girl, but I am a King’s daughter, 
and I would be a poor one indeed if I could not play 
the part of a son in this matter. Am I not equal to a 
man in strength and quickness of hand ? No prince 
in thy realm can best me in riding or in fight. I will 
go with King Marko and battle by his side.” 



224 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

“Nay,” said he. “What would men say of me if I 
sent thee, the youngest of my daughters, to the war? ” 
She continued to press him, however, even with 
tears, till at last he said, “Well, if thou must, thou 
shalt go.” And he gave her a fiery horse and a 
sword and armor, and she rode away, with her little 
dog Noiteshe in a basket tied to the saddle. 

And as he had done with her sisters, he took the 
pelt of a monstrous bear and in the mountain ravine 
wrapped himself in it and flew out upon her. But she 
leaped from her horse, and drawing her sword, met 
him with such skill and courage that he threw off" the 
bear’s pelt, exclaiming, “Hold thy hand!” 

Then he embraced and kissed her. “Though a girl,” 
said he, “thou wilt never shame me! But for thy long 
hair no one would know thee for one.” 

“Cut off my hair,” she told him, and with his 
knife he cut it short like a lad’s, and she bade him 
farewell and rode to join King Marko. 

Now King Marko’s troops faced the invading army 
on a great plain, ready for the battle. She rode to his 
tent and dismounted before him, saying, “My father, 
King Pjeter, sends me, his son Theodor, to thee in 
his place.” When he saw her, fully armed and sword 
in hand, with her horse pawing the ground and 
snorting for the fight, he rejoiced. “Thou art a 



PRINCESS WHO HAD THE SILVER TOOTH 225 
worthy King’s son!” he exclaimed, and putting her 
with his highest officers, bade his heralds sound the 
call for the battle. 

Then the two hosts rushed against one another and 
the fight began in the greatest fury. They fought one 
hour, they fought two hours and three hours, till the 
enemy was hard beset, with generals fallen and troops 
in confusion. 

Now the son of that King was named Qyrumbeti, 
and he was stalwart and handsome and strong as the 
rocks. When he saw his father’s plight he dismounted 
from his horse and with a sword in either hand 
rushed against King Marko’s troops like a swift black 
eagle, so that they fell back, while his own men took 
heart and reformed their lines. Then, standing in the 
space between the two armies, he lifted his swords 
and shook them, shouting, “O King Marko! Let thy 
best warrior come against me single-handed, and let 
the result decide the day!” 

Scarce had he said this when Theodora, leaping 
from her saddle, engaged him in the combat, and 
both armies laid aside their weapons and stood watch- 
ing. The Prince Qyrumbeti was brave as a young lion, 
but she was his equal in sword play, and so they con- 
tended till evening, neither able to overcome the other, 
till dark fell and they could see to fight no longer. 



226 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

Then the two Kings came together and made peace, 
and next day they drank wine in friendship from a 
golden cup. Before the invading army departed, the 
King who led it said to King Marko, “As a pledge of 
our good will, let thy champion, Theodor, who 
fought my son, go with us to my capital for a visit, 
for Prince Qyrumbeti is enraptured with him, and 
the two should be friends.” King Marko agreed, and 
Theodora (whom all supposed a lad) went with them, 
taking with her her little dog Noiteshe in his basket. 

For twenty days they rode together, she and the 
young Prince, he so handsome that it took good eyes 
to look at him, and she more lovely than a lad has 
any right to be. They rode bridle to bridle by day, 
and slept side by side in the same tent by night, but 
while she was long ago deep as the deep sea in love 
with him he knew not what ailed him. 

So they came to his capital, where she was housed 
in the royal palace and entertained with all manner 
of feasts and sports. But each day Prince Qyrumbeti 
grew more melancholy. His mother, the Queen, noted 
this, wondering that when he was with the young 
Prince Theodor he seemed at one time both joyful 
and sad. Then she fell to observing his guest, and 
noting how his cheeks and chin had not a sign of a 
hair on them, a suspicion came to her. She went to 



PRINCESS WHO HAD THE SILVER TOOTH 227 
her husband and said she, “Hast thou noted anything 
strange in the Prince Theodor?” 

He asked, “What meanest thou?” 

She answered, “He is too handsome for a boy and 
his skin is like an apricot’s. What if he should be not 
boy, but girl?” 

Exclaimed he, “Nonsense ! ” 

“Nevertheless,” said she, “it is in my mind that I 
am right and that our son has fallen in love with her, 
but does not know it.” 

“It will be easy to test it,” he replied, and sum- 
moning his son Qyrumbeti, he said to him, “Prince 
Theodor has not visited the bazaar. Do thou take 
him there, that he may buy what pleases his fancy.” 
So Qyrumbeti took his guest to the bazaar, while the 
King said to his wife, “If he is what thou thinkest, 
he will have an eye for jewels and silver trinkets and 
brocade girdles. If he is what he seems he will buy 
daggers or bridle chains.” 

Now the little dog Noi'teshe was lying beneath the 
divan in the room where they talked. He hastened to 
tell his mistress what he had heard, and in the bazaar 
Theodora did not even glance at anything but swords, 
guns, and saddles. So that after they returned to the 
palace and the King had questioned Qyrumbeti, he 
said to the Queen, “Thou wert mistaken.” 



228 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

Said she, “There is another test which I shall try. 
To-night I shall secretly put under his bed a bouquet 
of fresh flowers. In the morning, if he is a lad they will 
be no less beautiful, while if he is a girl they will be 
faded.” 

This time also the little dog chanced to be under 
the divan, and hearing their conversation, ran to tell 
his mistress. So that Theodora that night slept not in 
the bed but on the floor, and in the morning the 
flowers were as fresh as ever. 

When the Queen reported this to the King, he 
laughed. Said he, “Well, art thou convinced? To be 
sure he is no more girl than I am!” 

But said she, “I am not yet convinced.” And that 
evening she called Qyrumbeti to her room and said 
to him, “O my son! Of late thou hast seemed sad and 
moody, when thou shouldst be joyful. Can it be that 
thou dost no longer look with pleasure on the Prince 
Theodor?” 

He replied, “O Mother mine! I know not why it is, 
but when he is not with me I cannot endure even the 
sunlight or the singing of birds. Yet when he is by 
my side, I know not whether to laugh or weep. I fear 
that I am sick, for indeed at some times I wish to 
die.” 

Said she, “My son, by those words I know that 



PRINCESS WHO HAD THE SILVER TOOTH 229 
thou art in the grip of love. I am convinced that our 
guest is in truth princess rather than prince.” 

When she said this he turned pale. “How may I tell 
if this is so?” he exclaimed. “If he is a girl I must 
marry her. In the whole white world there is none 
other for me !” 

Said she, “To-morrow morning propose that you 
ride together. Turn your horses to the seaside and 
when you come to the beach, say to him, ‘Let us 
refresh ourselves with a bath in the salt waves.’ So 
saying, doff thy clothes and leap into the water. If 
the Prince Theodor is a lad he will do likewise, but if 
a girl she will make some excuse.” 

Accordingly, next morning after they had break- 
fasted, Prince Qyrumbeti said to Theodora, “Let us 
mount our horses and ride,” and they did so. But this 
time the little dog No'iteshe had not heard the 
Queen’s words, and when the Prince turned their 
course toward the sea she made no objection. So, 
when their horses’ hoofs tossed the white sand, he dis- 
mounted, and saying, “Come, comrade, the sun is 
over-hot. Let us cool ourselves in the waves!” he 
threw off his clothes and leaped into the water, shout- 
ing to her to follow. 

At this she knew that she was discovered. Thought 
she, “He has known it all along, and counting me un- 



230 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

maidenly, has no respect for me!” And in shame and 
anger, she cried, 

“ Whether thou icert fooled , or no, 

Girl I came , girl I go!” 

With the words she turned her horse, when, seeing her 
taking to flight, he cried to her, “Take this token of 
me!” and threw the signet ring from his finger, which 
struck out one of her teeth. 

She galloped like the wind to the palace, where her 
little dog waited her return at the door, and snatching 
him up, set out for her own country. Whether she 
rode a short while or a long while, at length she ar- 
rived there and King Pjeter welcomed her with joy. 
Exclaimed he, “Glory to the hoofs that bring thee! 
Is the war finished ?” 

She answered, “It is finished, and save for the loss 
of a tooth, I am unhurt.” 

So she took up her life as before, and the King had a 
silver tooth made for her, from which she was called 
the Princess-of-the-Silver-Tooth. During her absence 
her older sisters had married, but though he would 
have chosen a husband for her also, she would not 
listen, saying always, “My dear father, I am quite 
happy with thee and my little dog Noiteshe.” But 



PRINCESS WHO HAD THE SILVER TOOTH 23 1 
having fallen in love with the Prince Qyrumbeti, 
when she remembered how beautiful he had looked 
in the sea with the sunlight shining on his white body, 
and told herself that he would never love her in re- 
turn, she would weep salt tears in secret. 

So it was with her. But as for Prince Qyrumbeti, 
when he found the little tooth lying on the ground by 
his ring, he thought, “Alas! What have I done! She 
will hate me now forever!” He put the tooth in his 
girdle and galloped to the palace, and when he found 
that she had fled, he fell down in a faint. They 
brought him to by burning a crow’s feather under his 
nostrils, when he said to his mother, “Thou wert 
right! But now I have lost her!” And in his grief he 
rose not from his bed for seven days. 

At the end of this time she said to him, “O my son! 
Do not give way to despair, but hold thy heart in 
peace. Journey to her land, for there she has gone; 
and when thou hast found her, use thy wits to gain 
her.” 

He took heart at this and rose and bathed and set 
out, with money in his girdle, for the land of King 
Pjeter. On the way he bought a quantity of costly 
trinkets of gold and silver such as women love, and 
when he came to its capital, having traded his costly 
robes and turban for the dress and tray of a pedlar, 



232 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

and dyed his face and hands two shades darker with 
walnut juice, he hawked them about the streets, cry- 
ing, “Gold and silver earrings and finger-rings! Brace- 
lets and girdles of silver and gold!” But he asked for 
everything so great a price that those who would have 
bargained with him went away with their upper lips 
lengthened, saying to one another, “The things this 
stranger carries must be of the greatest worth and 
variety.” Thus his reputation grew till it reached the 
royal palace. 

One day the old woman who built the fires for the 
Princess Theodora said to her, “Thou shouldst see 
the wares of the foreign pedlar who has come to the 
city. Folk say they are finer than any in the shops and 
fit only for Kings’ daughters.” 

She answered, “Go and see them, and if they are 
indeed so fine, tell me.” 

The old woman accordingly found Qyrumbeti in 
the bazaar and sitting down with him, said, “Long 
life to thee! My mistress has sent me to see thy wares.” 

He replied, “And to thee long life! My goods are of 
great price, fit only for Kings’ daughters.” 

Said she, “My mistress is of high degree.” 

So he unwrapped them and spread them before her, 
and after she had admired them, said she, “I shall tell 
my mistress of them.” 



PRINCI.SS WHO HAD THE SILVER TOOTH 233 

“Glory to thine eyes!” he said, and gave her a 
silver ring for herself. Now she noted that he wore a 
fine gold chain about his neck under his shirt, and 
she asked him, “What wearest thou on that?” He 
drew it out and she saw that at its end was a little 
tooth. At that she laughed, saying, “Thou wearest 
about thy neck a tooth of bone that should be in thy 
head, while my mistress wears in her head a tooth of 
silver that should be about her neck!” 

From this he guessed that the old woman was a serv- 
ant of the Princess Theodora, and he took back the 
silver ring and gave her a gold one, and said he, 
“Blessings on her house! I have a gold bracelet that 
shall be thine on the day she sends for me.” 

So the old woman went back to the palace and said 
to the Princess, “0 my soul! I have seen the foreign 
pedlar’s stock, and there is nothing in all this land to 
be laid beside it. Let me fetch him, that they may 
gladden thine eyes.” 

She answered, “Do so.” 

The next day, therefore, the old woman found him 
on a street corner, and said she, “My mistress will see 
thee, and she is no less than the daughter of our 
King.” 

Giving her the gold bracelet he had promised her, 
he went with her, rejoicing, and she led him to the 



234 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES - 

palace and to the Princess Theodora’s room. When he 
saw her his breath stopped, and his love overcame 
him, so that he could not speak. As for her, worn as 
he was from the hardships of the journey anc! with his 
darker skin, she did not recognize him, and thinking 
he had a touch of sun, sent the old woman for a glass 
of wine and made him drink it, while she examined 
the articles he had brought. 

Among these was a golden plate on which he had 
had engraved a picture of the royal palace where she 
had been a guest, and seeing it, she caught her breath. 
“What is that?” she asked. 

He answered, “It is the palace in my own coun- 
try.” 

Said she, “It is a noble one, fit for a great King. 
Long life to him! And to his son, if son he has, good 
health.” 

“He has a son,” he told her. 

“What is his name?” 

“He is called Qyrumbeti.” 

When he spoke the name the blood rose in her 
cheeks, and he was glad, thinking, “She at least 
remembers me.” Presently she dismissed him, bidding 
him bring his tray again the next day when she would 
make selection of what most pleased her. 

Now as he stood before her, his neck chain had 



PRINCESS WHO HAD THE SILVER TOOTH 235 
peeped from betwixt his robe edges and she had noted 
it. When he was gone she said to the old woman, 
“What luck charm does he wear on his neck chain?” 
The other answered, “O my lady, it is a dear little 
tooth, and never have I seen the like.” 

At that the Princess started. “Can it be,” she 
thought, “that it is he, indeed? There was something 
in his look that made my heart beat!” And she said to 
the old woman, “With all his valuables it is not safe 
for him to stay at an inn, where there are always 
thieves about. Overtake him and, if he will, he may 
stay here in the servants’ quarters. Only let him 
think it is of thine own kindness.” 

The old woman, accordingly, ran after him to the 
courtyard, and said, “There are many robbers in the 
city, and I fear for thee at thine inn. Let me find thee 
a place here, where thou and thy goods shall be safe:” 

“Glory to thy lips!” he answered, and went with 
her gladly, and she put him in a room next her own 
and bade the gate guard pass him in and out of the 
palace. 

That afternoon as he sat pondering his situation 
and feeling his love like a hot coal in his breast, he 
exclaimed aloud, “0 my Princess-of-the-Silver- 
Tooth! How long the time till to-morrow!” Now 
Theodora had bidden her little dog follow him and re- 



236 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

port to her what he said and did, and lying in the 
courtyard beneath his window, Noi'teshe heard this 
and ran at once to tell her. Thought she, then, “It is 
none other than the Prince Qyrumbeti!” And she 
called the old fire-lighter and said to her, “I am lonely 
to-day. Bid the foreign pedlar come to me an hour 
after sunset. He shall tell me of his own country and 
his tales perhaps will distract me.” 

When the Prince received the message, he told 
himself, “This will be my chance!” And he went to a 
druggist and bought a packet of a powder so powerful 
that a pinch of it would cast a person into such a deep 
sleep that if he fell down on the ground no grass 
would grow near him. He put this in his breast and 
carried it with him when the old woman brought him 
to the Princess. 

When she saw him this time she knew him, and her 
love made her cheeks like spring roses. She made him 
sit down and bade the old woman fetch wine. When 
she brought it, he said, “0 Princess! Give me leave to 
pour it.” And as he poured it he dropped into her cup 
and that of the old woman a pinch of the powder 
from his breast, so that they had no sooner drunk it 
gull-gull-gull than they fell instantly into a slumber 
from which an earthquake would not have wakened 
them. 



PRINCESS WHO HAD THE SILVER TOOTH 237 
Then he put the Princess, together with her little 
dog, into the sack which had held his gold and silver 
articles, and took the sack on his back and bore it 
from the palace. At the city gate he had waiting a 
swift horse, and he set off, carrying her before him 
on the saddle, for his own land. 

He rode all night without pause till a cock crowed, 
when the Princess stirred in his arms and, half- 
conscious, said she: 

“ Whether thou wert fooled, or no. 

Girl I came, girl I go” 

Presently another cock crowed, and she opened her 
eyes, saying, “Where am I?” 

At that he laughed, and answered her: 

“ Fooled indeed 1 was. But now 
Husband am I. Wife art thou.” 

Then she knew that he had tricked her and stolen her 
away, and anger seized her. She closed her mouth and 
said no word more, remaining silent throughout the 
entire journey, till he brought her to his capital. 

He took her to his mother, who kissed her, saying, 
“0 my soul! Be not angry with my son, who loves 



238 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

thee more than his ears and cannot live without thee, 

but consent to be my dear daughter and his wife!” 

But she stood before them with her eyes cast down 
and would not speak. Nor would she reply to the 
King, so that they knew not what to do, and Prince 
Qyrumbeti’s shoulders fell. And thus a whole year 
went over the tops of the mountains without anyone 
hearing from her so much as an “Ah!” or an “Oh!” 

At the end of this time the King lost patience, and 
summoning the Prince, said, “0 my son! There is an 
end to everything. It is time for thee to take a wife, 
and as she will not have thee, choose another.” 

The Prince Qyrumbeti went to her and besought 
her with tears, but to no avail, and at last he was 
forced to agree. So another bride was chosen and the 
wedding was arranged. And the King gave order that 
the Princess Theodora sweep the street by which the 
bride would pass from her parents’ house to the 
palace. This she did with no word of complaint, wear- 
ing out seven brooms in the labor. 

- All were busy preparing the marriage feast and the 
bride was entering the gate, when the Prime Minister 
came to the King and said, “0 Majesty! The fisher- 
men have not brought the fish for the bridal dish, for 
there is none to be caught in the river.” 

Cried the King, “Whoever heard of a mar^g$ge 



PRINCESS WHO HAD THE SILVER TOOTH 239 
feast without the dish which is prepared by the 
bride?” And he commanded that all the fishermen in 
the city go and throw their nets. But though five 
hundred of them toiled for half the afternoon they 
got no fish as big as your little finger, so that the King 
and Queen were in despair. 

It happened, however, that the little dog Noiteshe, 



overhearing them complaining, went and told the 
Princess, and she bade him go and try. He ran to the 
river and quicker than one could tell it back he came, 
dragging by the tail a fish as long as a hoe handle. 

When the Princess had drawn and cleaned it, she 
wrapped it in fresh fig leaves and carried it to the 
kitchen. But when the bride saw it all ready for the 
baking, she fell into a passion. " Dost thou think thy- 
self the bride?” she cried, and snatching it from the 


240 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

Princess’ hands, thrust it into the oven. But in her 
anger she forgot to sweep away the hot ashes, and 
when the oven door was opened, the fish was a cinder. 
When she saw it burned and blackened shame over- 
came her, and she tore off her veil and ran back to her 
parents’ house, shrieking. 

That night Theodora said to her little dog, “0 
Noiteshe, I can bear it no longer. Do thou make thy 
way, if thou art able, to our own land, and tell my 
father what has befallen me, so that he can come to 
my rescue.” He answered, “I will start this very 
night.” 

This he did, but his legs and his breath were short 
and the trail was long and the hills were high (and 
once the gypsies stole him) so that another year went 
by before she heard of him again. 

All this while, though Prince Qyrumbeti pleaded 
with her many times, she would speak no word, so 
that at length the King chose a Second bride for his 
son and preparations were made as before for the 
wedding. And again the fishermen could bring no fish 
by reason of the great drought that had dried up the 
river’s deep pools. Hearing of it, this time Theodora 
went alone to the river and said a prayer, when, as 
she rose from her knees, a fish, leaping for a blue- 
bottle fly, fell on the bank. This she opened and 



PRINCESS WHO HAD THE SILVER TOOTH Z4I 
dressed, and brought it to the palace kitchen in time 
for the bride to prepare her bridal dish. 

Now this bride was no less spiteful than the first 
had been, and hated Theodora for her greater beauty. 
When she opened the oven door, seeing it filled with 
ashes, she said to her, “There is no brush to sweep 
away the ashes. Wilt thou not let me use thy hair?” 
For reply the Princess came, and bowing her head, 
let down her long curling hair and the bride swept 
away the ashes with it. To the surprise of all, how- 
ever, it was not burned, but shone more goldenly 
and curled more beautifully than before. 

At that the bride was more envious of her than 
ever, and when the oven was clogged again, she 
thought, “Ashes must be good for the hair!” and 
used her own. But lo, it caught fire from a spark 
and blazed up, leaving her as bald as a pumpkin. 
So like the first, she ran home in shame without once 
looking back. 

Now while all was thus in confusion, with the 
Queen weeping, the King fuming with rage, and the 
Prince Qyrumbeti in the depths of despair, there 
came galloping from the frontier sentinels of the 
King, crying that a great army was marching on the 
realm. For the little dog Noiteshe, after hardships 
that had worn him to his bones, had at last reached 



242 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

the Princess’ country and her father had marshalled 
his troops and called upon his neighbor, King Marko, 
to aid him, and their joint forces had set out to avenge 
her wrong. 

Immediately the King bade his generals assemble 
his soldiers and make ready for the conflict. But 
Prince Qyrumbeti went to Theodora, and said he, 
“O my Princess! Art thou willing to plunge our two 
countries into bloody war over such a matter? For 
since the first day we met in the fight I have loved 
thee and I shall never love another. I stole thee from 
thy home because I could not live without thee. But 
during these three years thou hast given me only 
silence and contempt. I pray thee, soften thy heart 
toward me, before I fling my life away in the 
battle.” 

When she heard these words Theodora’s shoulders 
fell. Said she, “I should be punished with all punish- 
ments! I also have loved thee since our first sight of 
one another, and if thou shouldst die thus, I would no 
more wish to live. Let us forgive one another.” 

Then in joy he kissed her on the mouth and she 
kissed him. They went and told the King and Queen, 
and the royal cooks fell to again, and the feast being 
made ready, they were married that same hour. 

And when the army of her father and King Marko 



PRINCESS WHO HAD THE SILVER TOOTH 243 
came, they rode to meet it side by side, wearing their 
marriage crowns. 

Up to this time the tale has lasted, and its tellers 
are fortunate. Retell it and thou shalt be luckier than 
they. May we have health! 




THE BOY WHO WAS BROTHER TO THE 
DRAGtfE 





THE BOY WHO WAS BROTHER TO THE 
DRAGtfE 

r f A LAND so far away that an eagle would moult 
three times in flying thither, there was once a 
King named Sokol, who through misfortune had lost 
his throne. An enemy was seated upon it while he was 
reduced to a poor farm on the skirt of the capital, 
where he labored as a vine-grower and his wife who 
had been Queen all day long spun hemp thread to 

247 




248 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

help keep their souls in their bodies. There remained 
to him, besides, only his finger ring that held his 
jewel of kingship, which was a diamond as big as an 
acorn, and a blooded mare that could run five days 
and nights without stopping to rest. He had no son, 
which was like an iron nail in his heart. 

One day in the winter season, when there was not 
so much as a handful of corn meal in the bin, he went 
to the river and cast his line and took a fish of great 
size and red in color, which said to him, “0 Sokol, 
health to thee! I am thy good luck. Take me home 
and when thou hast cut me in pieces and cooked me, 
eat my body and let thy wife eat my head. Give my 
fins and tail to thy mare and bury my entrails and 
scales in thy garden.” When it had said this it ceased 
to breathe. 

Sokol did as it had bidden him, and in the next 
harvest his wife bore him two sons, one blue eyed 
with golden hair whom they named Zjermi, and one 
with eyes and hair like night whom they called 
Handa — and both so beautiful that the sun seemed 
to sit on their foreheads! His mare brought forth two 
strong-limbed foals, and there sprang up amid the 
flowers in his garden a silver sword. Also his vines 
bore more richly than any in the neighborhood, so 
that he became prosperous. 



BOY WHO WAS BROTHER TO THE DRAGUE 249 

His wife tended the babes like princes, feeding 
them at first with her own milk, and later with white 
bread made of wheat meal sifted through seven 
sieves, the flesh of doves and fat lambs, and wine 
pressed from white grapes. She washed them in fresh 
spring water, combed their hair with a silver comb, 
and clad them in clean thin linen. For his part, Sokol, 
as the boys grew, taught them to ride a horse bare- 
back, to throw the spear and wield sword and dagger, 
and to hunt the wild beasts of the forest. So the years 
went over the tops of the mountains till they were 
seventeen and as sturdy and handsome as young 
birch trees. 

At the end of that time plague came to the land 
and their father and mother died. When his black 
hour caught him Sokol called the lads to his bedside. 
“O, sons of my soul!” he said, “I am about to leave 
you. Whatever fate holds for you, forget not you are 
King’s sons. Treat your friends with kindness and 
your enemies with justice, and may you in time win 
back to the high estate from which I have fallen.” 

The brothe*6 buried their father and mother with 
tears, mourning for. them ten days and nights. Then 
Zjermi said to Handa, “The white world is wide. 
Let us go forth, like the King’s sons we are, to seek 
our fortunes.” 



250 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

Handa replied, “Thou hast spoken mine own de- 
sire.” 

Said Zjermi, then, “Our father has left us two 
things of value, his finger ring of kingship and his 
silver sword. Since we are of equal age, let us cast lots 
for them.” Accordingly they cast lots and the choice 
falling to him he chose the sword and the ring went 
to Handa. So Handa put the ring on his finger and 
Zjermi thrust the sword in his girdle, and mounting 
their swift horses, they rode from the capital together 
to find what they should find. 

They rode thus five days, they rode ten days, and 
on the eleventh day they came to where the road 
branched, one trail going to the north and the other 
to the south. There Zjermi said, “Here let us part, 
since no two men have like fortunes. Do thou choose 
one trail and I will follow the other.” 

But, “Nay,” said Handa, “the choice shall be 
thine.” 

“Let us cast lots,” said Zjermi. So they did so, and 
the lot fell to Handa. 

“Well, I will take the northern trail,” said 'he, 
“and thou shalt have the southern. May we both find 
good luck!” 

Said Zjermi, then, “Each of us wears a locket 
whose jewel will turn black if he is in sickness of peril. 



BOY WHO WAS BROTHER TO THE DRAGUE 25 1 
Let us exchange these, thou taking mine and I thine. 
If I see thy jewel losing its color I will at once return 
to this spot and take thy trail to find thee, and do 
thou do likewise.” 

To this Handa agreed. Each hung the other’s locket 
about his neck and they kissed each other and set out 
in their different directions. 

Now as for Handa, he went as far as he went, cross- 
ing plains and mountains, till he came to a forest so 
dense that the sunlight did not pierce its shade, and a 
league within its border was twilight. On its edge sat 
an old man, with a white beard three yards long, 
cracking hazelnuts. Said Handa, “Health to thee. 
Grandfather. Canst thou guide me through this for- 
est?” 

The old man replied, “And to thee health! Ask 
me not that. It is to warn travellers like thyself 
against entering it that I sit here.” 

“Why should one not do so?” demanded Handa. 

Answered the other, “In its center is the Palace of 
a BeautifuI-of-the-Earth so lovely that a hundred 
brave heroes have sought to win her to wife. But she 
is guarded by a Mamadreqja — which is to say an Old- 
Woman-of-the-Wood — who has magicked the palace 
so that no man who has entered it has come forth 
alive.” 



252 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

“I am a King’s son,” said Handa, “and fear no 
Mamadreqja in the white world! Nevertheless, I 
thank thee.” 

“Very well,” said the old man, “if thou wilt not 
heed my warning, go. And mayest thou not stumble 
on misfortune.” 

Handa spurred his horse into the gloomy forest, 
thinking, “For a wife so beautiful one might well risk 
his life.” He rode two hours and three, and in the 
fourth hour the Mamadreqja, who every day roamed 
the forest sniffing the breeze, caught the scent of him 
and put herself in his path. When she saw him riding, 
with hair black as midnight, cheeks red as two ripe 
pomegranates, and a brow white as mountain snow, 
she said to herself, “He is handsomer than any who 
have yet come this way. I will have some sport with 
him.” So she took the form of a maiden in a brocade 
robe and cried out to him, saying, “0 Sir, whoever 
thou art, help me in my distress!” 

When he beheld her, he thought, “This can be none 
other than the Beautiful-of-the-Earth, though she is 
not so lovely as I had thought!” He answered, 
“Health to thee, damsel! What dost thou here, and 
what harm has befallen thee?” 

“Alas!” said she, “I have struck my foot against a 
stone and it gives me such pain that I cannot walk. I 



BOY WHO WAS BROTHER TO THE DRAGUE 253 
pray thee, take me up on thy horse and carry me to 
my palace, which is not far distant, and all my thanks 
will be thine!” 

“Right gladly!” he answered, and lifting her, set 
her before him on the saddle. 

Said she, then, “The way lies to the right,” and he 
turned his horse in that direction; but when they had 
ridden some while, she said, “Nay, I was mistaken. 
We should go to the left.” So she continued, pointing 
him now one way and now another, always leading 
him cunningly farther from the heart of the forest, 
till they came to its border, when she sprang to the 
ground and resuming her hag form, scrambled, 
cackling with laughter, up a tree bole, and leaping 
from treetop to treetop, like an enormous lynx, dis- 
appeared in the forest. 

When, angered that he had been so fooled, he 
looked about him, lo there sat the old man, where he 
had been sitting all along, cracking hazelnuts. “Long 
life to thee!” said the old man. “Has bad luck caught 
thee so soon that thy shoulders droop ; ?” 

Handa told him his story and the old man said, 
“Thou hast met the Mamadreqja herself. Unless thou 
canst outwit her, thou wilt never see the Beaudful- 
of-the-Earth, no, never.” 

That night Handa slept on the ground, wrapped in 



254 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

his cloak, and next morning rode again into the forest. 
He rode four hours, he rode five hours, when again 
the Old-Woman-of-the-Wood, sitting in a treetop, 
scented him, and whistling up from their lairs in 
windfall and covert fifty fierce wolves, she took the 
form of a huge gray she-wolf and led them against 
him. 

Thus the pack, yelping and howling, rushed upon 
him, so that his horse, bounding into the air, turned 
and galloped back with him, so mad with fright that 
he could not stop it. Nor did the wolves leave off their 
pursuit till they came to the forest’s fringe, where 
Handa leaped from the saddle, sword in hand, and 
struck such a stroke at the pack’s leader that the 
blade cut off one of her paws, and she fled, limping 
on three legs and howling with pain, followed by the 
rest, while the severed paw at his feet became a hand, 
covered with black hairs, with fingers curved and 
clawed like an eagle’s. 

When he looked over his shoulder, lo, there sat the 
old man, cracking his hazelnuts. “Health to thee!” 
said he. “So thou hast again met misfortune! As thou 
seest, the great gray she-wolf was the Mamadreqja 
herself. Unless thou canst best her, give over all 
thought of seeing the Beautiful-of-the-Earth!” 

“See her I willl” answered Handa. “And once I 



BOY WHO WAS BROTHER TO THE DRAGUE 255 
find her palace, nothing shall prevent me from enter- 
ing it.” 

Said the old man, then, “Thou hast courage. 
But beware to enter it by its gateway, for he who 
passes through it that instant falls down dead.” 

That second night also Handa slept on the ground 
wrapped in his cloak and when morning came, rode 
for the third time into the forest. He rode all day, he 
rode all night, seeing neither bird, beast, nor human 
being, and at sunrise of the next morning he came to 
where the thick trees became a flowering meadow, 
in whose center stood a palace of golden-veined 
marble surrounded by a high wall of gray stone. 

“Well,” thought he, “I have at last found the 
dwelling of the BeautifuI-of-the-Earth, and the Old- 
Woman-of-the-Wood shall not bar me from her. But 
first I shall rest awhile.” So, weary from the long ride, 
he dismounted, and turning his horse to graze on the 
tall grass, he lay down and fell asleep. 

Now that morning the Beautiful-of-the-Earth sum- 
monded the Mamadreqja, who came with her left 
arm wrapped in a bloody bandage, and she asked her, 
“What has injured thee?” 

The Old-Woman-of-the-Wood replied, “The day 
before yesterday, when I would have cut me a staff" 
in the forest, my knife slipped and slashed off" my 



256 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

hand. As it will be a month before it grows again, 
while I cannot protect thee go not outside the wall, 
lest harm come to thee.” 

The Beautiful-of-the-Earth went to sit on her bal- 
cony that overlooked the meadow where Handa lay 
asleep, and presently she said to the Mamadreqja, “I 
see a spot of white in the tall grass.” 

“It is only a white stone,” the Old-Woman-of-the- 
Wood replied. 

“Is there anything whiter than a white stone?” 
asked the Beautiful-of-the-Earth. 

“Aye,” grumbled the Mamadreqja, “the brow of a 
man I met in the forest.” 

Said the Beautiful-of-the-Earth, then, “I see spots 
of black above the white.” 

The old Witch Grandmother answered, “What 
should it be but the feathers of a dead crow?” 

“Is there nothing blacker than a crow?” 

“Aye,” snapped the Mamadreqja, “the hair and 
eyebrows of the man I met in the forest.” 

After a while the Beautiful-of-the-Earth said, “I 
see two spots of red on the white stone.” 

“They are the crow’s blood.” 

. “Can there be anything redder than that?” 

“Aye,” snarled the Mamadreqja, grinding her 



BOY WHO WAS BROTHER TO THE DRAGUE 257 
teeth, “the cheeks of the man I met — may evil tread 
in his footsteps!” 

At that the Beautiful-of-the-Earth sighed, think- 
ing, “How handsome that man must be! Would that 
I might see himl” 

Now at that moment Handa woke and stretched 
himself, and the Beautiful-of-the-Earth exclaimed, 
“Why, it is a man, and yonder I see his horse graz- 
ing!” 

The Old-Woman-of-the-Wood looked a single look, 
and saying to herself, “It is the man who twice has 
got the better of me! He knows not what fear is, and 
my eyes are frightened to see him here!” she locked 
the Beautiful-of-the-Earth in the palace’s inner 
room. Then she took the form of a serving-maid, and 
going to the meadow, said to Handa, “Long life to 
thee, young sir! My mistress, whose door is open to all 
strangers, bids thee enter her palace that she may 
offer thee hospitality.” 

“Glory to thy mouth!” he replied. “I accept it.” 

So she hastened to open the gate, but seeing how 
her eyes glittered, he remembered the old man’s 
warning. Cried he, “Trouble not thyself. I know a 
quicker way!” And leaping to his saddle, he spurred 
his horse straight at the high wall. Now the wall was 



258 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

magicked so that whoever touched it was turned to 
stone, and though the horse leaped so valiantly that 
it cleared it, a single hair of its tail and the heel of 
Handa’s boot brushed against its top, so that in- 
stantly, as they alighted in the garden within, both 
horse and rider became gray stone. 

Now the garden was filled with the images of 
heroes who had thus been enchanted, but among 
them all none was so noble as Handa or sat his horse 
so gracefully, so that the Beautiful-of-the-Earth, as 
she walked there that evening, saw the new statue 
with admiration. She called the Mamadreqja and 
asked her, “Who is this? For I do not remember see- 
ing him before.” 

The Old-Woman-of-the-Wood replied, “That is 
the man I told thee of that I saw in the forest!” 

When she heard this the Beautiful-of-the-Earth 
secretly wept salt tears, thinking, “Alas that one so 
handsome should be made nothing but cold stone! 
Would that I knew the secret of the Mamadreqja’s 
magic that I might cause him to live again!” 

Thus it fared with Handa, who received his father’s 
finger ring of kingship. Now must be told what befell 
his twin brother, Zjermi, who chose his father’s silver 
sword. 

Zjermi rode three days, he rode four days, and on 



BOY WHO WAS BROTHER TO THE DRAGUE 259 
the fifth day, as he threaded a lonely ravine amid 
the mountains, he beheld a man’s hand thrust up 
from a rubble of rock in the dry bed of a stream. 
Thought he, “It is a traveller who has been swept 
from his trail by a land-slip, and no doubt he is as 
dead as nails!” He unwound his girdle and looping it 
about a tree, let himself down, and when he had 
dragged away the boulders, found a lad of his own 
age, bleeding and with a broken leg but still breath- 
ing. 

Zjermi carried him to the trail and stripped him to 
bind his wounds, when he saw growing in his armpits 
tiny wings like those of an eaglet. Wondering, he 
splinted the stranger’s broken bone with strips of 
bark and rubbed him to consciousness, and making a 
camp, fell to nursing him and feeding him with wild 
game till he was able to walk, by which time they 
were the best of comrades. 

When they said farewell to one another, the lad, 
whose name was Zef, said to him, “Glory to thy 
hands that have tended me! But for thee I would 
now be food for the wolves! Though we must part, 
let us become blood-brothers.” 

Zjermi replied, “Willingly.” So each cut his finger 
and they mingled the blood and drank of it together. 

Said Zef, then, “We are now brothers. If at any 



260 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

time I can serve thee, thou hast only to call me and 

thou shalt have my aid, even at cost of my life.” 

‘‘My thanks. Brother,” answered Zjermi. “I say 
to thee the same. Would that our ways lay not wide 
apart, so that we might indeed summon one another.” 

Said Zef, “If thou hast ever need of me, kindle 
three fires two yards apart, and standing between 
them, call aloud three times, ‘0 Zef, son of Sheqirl’ 
and before those fires are out I shall be with thee.” So 
saying he strode away into the mountain. 

Zjermi rode ten days, he rode twenty days, cross- 
ing mountains and valleys, till he came at length to a 
land shut in by snowy peaks. Through it ran a swift 
river on whose bank was its capital. He entered the 
city’s gate and there was neither man, woman, nor 
child to be seen on its streets and Squares^ The doors 
and windows of every house were shut, and from be- 
hind them came such sounds of weeping and wailing 
that his horse drooped its neck between its knees. 

When he had ridden thus through the principal 
street without meeting so much as a beggar, Zjermi 
dismounted, and knocked at the door of an inn. It was 
opened by an aged man to whom he said, “Greetings 
to thee! I am a stranger who would remain awhile 
under thy roof.” The man took his horse to the 
stable, and when he had brought him in and had set 



BOY WHO WAS BROTHER TO THE DRAGUE 26 1 
bread and wine before him, Zjermi asked him, “Why 
is thy city so sad ?” 

The other replied, “We mourn because the Royal 
Princess, Bardha-Kuqe, the White-Red One, the 
daughter of our King, is to die to-morrow.” 

Asked Zjermi, “What is her illness?” 

“Nay,” said the old man, “she is in health. But the 
lot has fallen upon her and she is to be given to the 
Kuchedra.” 

“I have indeed heard of the Kuchedra,” said 
Zjermi, “though it is not known in mine own land. Is 
thy city in the power of one of the loathsome crea- 
tures ?” 

The other answered, “Aye. For more years than 
can be counted it has had its lair in the gorge whence 
our river flows. Each month a maiden, chosen by lot, 
must be given it to devour, else it blocks the water, 
so that the river dries up and the people perish from 
thirst. A year ago I thus lost my only child, and this 
month it is to be the Royal Princess.” 

“Of what nature is the Kuchedra?” asked Zjermi. 

The old man replied, “It begins life as a small 
worm in a dark cave or deep Assure in the earth. 
Each flfty years, if it be not seen by mortal eye, it 
changes to a more terrible shape, till at two hundred 
years it becomes the Kuchedra. It is then of mon- 



26Z ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

strous size, and so filled with poison that its very 
breath kills the high-flying birds and the yellow foam 
it spits strikes any living thing dead. Our Kuchedra 
is of the bulk of forty oxen, in form like a woman, 
gray as willow bark, with breasts that hang to its 
knees, and red hair that whips about it like snakes. 
It is older than the oldest cypress tree and more to 
be dreaded than an army of lions.” 

Now while they talked tumult rose in the street, 
and the old man said, “It is the hour when the 
Princess is to ride through the city, taking her fare- 
well of the people.” 

So Zjermi went out with him, and they mingled 
with the crowd, and presently the palace gate opened 
and the Princess Bardha-Kuqe rode forth on a horse 
as white as milk. She rode up one street and down 
another, and wherever she went the people stood 
weeping salt tears. She was so lovely that she could 
not be described in a tale or written of in a song, and 
the instant his eyes beheld her Zjermi fell deeper than 
the deepest sea in love with her. At the thought that 
on the morrow she must become the prey of the Ku- 
chedra he wept with the rest, and when she had rid- 
den back into the palace he returned' to the inn in such 
anguish that he scarce knew his hands from his feet. 

There he asked the old man, “Has thy King no 



BOY WHO WAS BROTHER TO THE DRAGUE 263 
soldiers and this land no heroes who can overcome 
the Kuchedra and put it to death?” 

The other answered, “Swords and spears of steel 
are powerless before its poisonous breath, and its lair 
is sown with the white bones of brave men who have 
gone against it. There is but one thing that can over- 
come the Kuchedra, and that is the Drague.” 

Asked Zjermi, “What is a Drague?” 

The old man replied, “It happens now and then 
that among the ten thousand boy babes born each 
year one will have little wings sprouting in its arm- 
pits. This is the sign of a Drague. When the mother 
beholds these wings on her new-born babe, she swad- 
dles it instantly, taking all care that no one else shall 
see it naked till it is old enough to know and guard its 
secret. Otherwise it will die. Thus the saying is ‘Only 
God and the mother know the Drague.’ ” 

When Zjermi heard this he said to himself, “May 
my life be shortened if Zef, my blood-brother, is not a 
Drague!” And he said to the other, “Tell me more.” 

Said the old man, “I can tell thee little else, save 
that such a babe grows to be a man of great strength, 
fearing nothing in the white world, and that from 
twelve years old the Drague have the power to call 
up thunder clouds at will and to fly naked through 
the air more swiftly than the eagles. They are the 



264 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

natural enemies of the Kuchedra, and when one of 
the creatures appears in a countryside where the 
Drague is known, they smell it out, and gather in 
numbers to assail it.” 

At these words Zjermi thought, “ Did not Zef, when 
we parted, tell me how to summon him from afar? 
What if he could help me lift the curse from this city 
and save the Princess whom I so love?” Then he 
asked, “If weapons of steel are useless against the 
Kuchedra’s poison, how can the Drague slay it?” 

The old man replied, “There is a single charm 
against which the yellow foam the Kuchedra spits 
has no power, and that is a cradle. When he attacks 
it, therefore, the Drague carries in his hands a cradle. 
And he fights not with sword and spear, but with 
thunderbolts which he snatches from the clouds he 
has called up. When the Kuchedra is stunned by 
these, it may be slain with a silver sword. But, alas! 
I have known of no Drague in this land!” 

When it was dark Zjermi went beyond the gate of 
the capital to a hidden spot, and kindling three fires 
two yards one from the other, took his stand in their 
midst and shouted three times, “0 Zef, Son of She- 
qir!” after which he sat down and waited. And before 
the fires died he heard a rustling in the upper air and 
instantly Zef, his blood-brother, stood naked beside 
him. 



BOY WHO WAS BROTHER TO THE DRAGUE 265 

Said Ze f, “Long life to thee, my Brother! How can I 
aid thee?’' 

Then Zjermi told him his story, and said he, “O 
my Brother! If indeed thou art able, I beseech thy 
help to kill the Kuchedra, which otherwise will de- 
vour my love.” 

Zef replied, “Do I not owe thee my life? Thou wert 
right to summon me. As I passed through the air I 
scented the creature, which we Drague are bound to 
slay. But first I must gather such of my comrades as 
may be reached in time. Return to thy inn and wait 
this night in peace. To-morrow, when the Princess 
goes to the Kuchedra’s lair, follow her and remain 
with her till the creature comes. Fear not but we 
Drague will be there, and I promise thee that thou 
shalt give it the death blow with thy silver sword.” 
So saying, he sprang into the air and vanished. 

Zjermi returned to the inn and spent the hours 
sharpening and polishing his sword, till the sun was 
high next day, when the old man came to him. Said 
he, “Sir, if thou art minded to see the last of our 
Princess, take thy stand at the city gate, for soon she 
will go forth to the Kuchedra.” So, when he had 
eaten and drunk he mounted his horse and with his 
silver sword in his girdle, rode to the gate, where a 
vast crowd was gathered, weeping and wailing for 



266 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

sorrow. Presently the royal procession came from the 
palace, and when the King and Queen for the last 
time had embraced the Princess, she set forth afoot 
to the gorge which was the Kuchedra’s lair, while all 
the people stood watching with tears till she had 
passed from sight. 

Then Zjermi dismounted, and saluting the King, 
said he, “0 King’s Majesty! I am a stranger, come 
only yesterday to thy capital. I have fallen in love 
with the Princess Bardha-Kuqe, to whom now I go. 
If I slay the Kuchedra and bring her back unharmed 
to thee, may I have her for my wife?” 

Cried the King, “Lift this curse from the land and 
not only shalt thou marry her, but thou shalt be my 
well-loved son to inherit my kingship and rule after 
me! But how shouldst thou succeed where a hundred 
heroes have lost their lives ?” 

Said Zjermi, “Nevertheless, give me thy blessing.” 

Then the King and the Queen blessed him, praising 
his courage but without hope, and returned sorrow- 
fully to the palace, while he rode after the Princess. 

As for her, at the entrance to the dark gorge, from 
whence the river flowed, she sank down on the 
ground, weeping for her sad lot and in terror of what 
awaited her. When she saw Zjermi riding toward her, 
she cried in amazement, “0 Brave Heart! What dost 



BOY WHO WAS BROTHER TO THE DRAGUE 267 
thou here? Think not to save me, which is impossible, 
but fly for thy life!” 

“Fear not for me, Most Beautiful!” he answered. 
“I and my sword are here to protect thee!” So saying, 
he dismounted and turning his horse to graze, sat 
down beside her. “I love thee,” he said. “Canst thou 
love me in return?” 

She replied, “Had thy love time to speak, mine 
own would answer it. For thou art such a hero as I 
have dreamed of. But I must die, and I would not 
cause thy death also! I pray thee mount and return 
to the city while there is yet time!” 

Said he, “After I have slain the Kuchedra we shall 
return together. But meanwhile I am weary and 
would rest. When it appears, wake me.” And so say- 
ing he laid his head in her lap and instantly fell asleep. 

Now as she sat watching his sleeping face, she felt 
love for him overflow her heart. Said she to herself, 
“I must die, indeed, but he shall not perish with me!” 
And whistling his horse softly to her, she bound his 
wrist to its bridle, thinking, “When the Kuchedra 
comes, the horse will be beside itself with fright, and 
will drag him to safety whether he will or no.” 

But a$ she bent over him, grieving, two tears fell 
from her eyes upon his face, and he half-woke and 
asked her, “What touched my face?” 



268 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

She replied* “0 my dear, it was but a raindrop.” 

So he slept again, and at last longing overcame her 
and she bent her head and kissed him on the mouth. 
At that he stirred and asked, “What touched my 
lips?” 

“O my dearest,” she answered, “it was only a fall- 
ing leaf.” 

So once more he slept, and presently the water of 
the river turned yellow and rose in boiling waves, the 
trees began to moan, and forth from the gloomy 
gorge came the Kuchedra. It was as big as a barn, 
its upper portion formed like a woman, scaled and 
clawed, with breasts dangling like swinging baskets 
and a mouth spitting yellow foam; and its rear was 
that of an enormous lizard, with a tail set with teeth 
like the tusks of a wild boar. As it came forth, its red 
eyes glared like smoky lanterns, and it roared so 
heart-shaking a roar that the very ground trembled. 

At the sound Zjermi woke, but the horse, trumpet- 
ing with fright, bounded away into the forest, drag- 
ging him with it, so that he could neither stop it 
nor draw *his sword to slash through the bridle thong 
that bound his wrist. When at last he was able to 
check its flight and to free himself, he ran back, 
sword in hand, to the river, thinking to find the 
Princess in the claws of the terrible creature. 



BOY WHO WAS BROTHER TO THE DRAGUE 269 

But lo, when he came there he beheld her still 
unharmed, lying where she had fainted on its bank. 
Before the gorge the Kuchedra reared, roaring, 
while above it hovered a blue-black thunder-cloud, 
come from nowhere. In and out of the cloud flew 
naked men, like the huge birds called Karrakush, 
who held in their left hands wooden cradles, and 
with their right hands snatched thunderbolts from 
its flashing heart and hurled them down upon the 
Kuchedra, which writhed in pain and fury. 

In vain it spouted its poison foam which fell harm- 
less from the cradle on which the Drague caught it. 
In vain it tried to regain its lair: while some of its 
assailants rolled great boulders to choke the mouth 
of the gorge, the rest redoubled their attacks till at 
last, after a long fight, the Kuchedra fell, stunned 
and bleeding from a hundred wounds. 

Then every Drague flew down to the ground, and 
Zef, who led them, said to him, “0 my Brother, take 
thy silver sword and thrust it to the heart. But hold) 
my cradle before thee lest it still have enough strength) 
to harm thee with its yellow foam.” 

So, holding the cradle, Zj ermi went forward and; 
thrust three thrusts. The first glanced from the Ku-» 
chedr'a’s scales, the second rebounded, but the third, 
into which he put all his might, tore through its body 



270 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

and pierced its heart, from which a torrent of foul- 
smelling black blood poured into the river. And in- 
stantly the red glare faded in its smoky eyes and it 
lay dead. Said Zef, “Cut out the creature’s tongue, 
for it is a charm which no magic in the white world 
can withstand.” And Zjermi did so, coiling the 
severed tongue about his waist under his girdle. 

Said Zef, then, “O my Brother, thou hast thy wish. 
The Kuchedra is dead, and thou hast gained the 
maiden of thy desire. All good and all happiness to 
theel” 

Zjermi replied, “And to thee also! If once I saved 
thy life, thou hast repaid the debt a hundred times, 
and a thousand times I thank thee.” 

Then they kissed each other, and Zef said to his 
Drague comrades, “Brothers, let us now return, each 
to his own place.” And instantly they flew into the 
air and vanished. 

Then Zjermi went to where the Princess Bardha- 
Kuqe lay, and kneeling beside her, fell to rubbing 
her feet till her eyelids fluttered, and he said to him- 
self, “Glory to my hands! Presently she will speak.” 

It was at that very moment that his brother 
Handa, in the northern land to which he had jour- 
neyed, leaping his horse over the wall of the Palace 
of the Beautiful-of-the-Earth, had been turned to 



BOY WHO WAS BROTHER TO THE DRAGUE 271 
stone by the magic of the Mamadreqja, and chancing 
to glance at the locket he wore about his neck 
Zjermi saw that its jewel had turned black. Said he 
to himself, “My brother Handa is in peril and I must 
go at once to rescue him! Yet how can I leave my 
love here in such plight?” 

Now in that capital lived a worthless braggart, of 
great strength but little valor, named Barkulku. He 
had stolen secretly from the city, on Zjermi’s trail, 
thinking to gain sight of the terrible Kuchedra with- 
out danger to himself. From a secret spot he had seen 
the battle, and now beholding the creature dead and 
Zjermi rubbing the Princess’ feet, he came from his 
hiding place. Exclaimed he, “ Health to thee, O Hero ! 
Would I had come in time to help thee in this fight!” 

Zjermi answered, “Thou canst aid me now, for I 
must depart without delay from this land. Wilt thou 
bear the Princess back to the King her father, and 
say that the curse of the Kuchedra is lifted from his 
capital and that I will return, so soon as may be, to 
claim her for my wife?” 

Said Barkulku, “Willingly.” 

So Zjermi, though it tore his heart to leave her, 
mounting his horse, set off at a gallop on the trail by 
which he had come thither. 

No sooner had he vanished than Bardha-Kuqe 



272 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

opened her eyes, and seeing the Kuchedra lying dead, 
and Barkulku beside her, exclaimed, “Where is the 
man who saved me?” 

Said he, “Who but myself has done so? As for the 
man of whom thou speakest, so soon as the Ku- 
chedra appeared he fled in terror and the beast was 
about to devour thee when I sprang upon it and slew 
it.” 

When she heard this the Princess wept, crying, “I 
will not believe that he whom I so loved was a 
coward!” 

But Barkulku cut off the Kuchedra’s dreadful 
head with his dagger and put it on his shoulder, and 
betook himself, with her, to the capital, where the 
people raised shouts of rejoicing, and the King re- 
ceived him with all honor, and ordered that prepara- 
tions be made for his marriage to Bardha-Kuqe. 

She, however, took to her bed, neither eating nor 
drinking, nor left she off weeping till the royal physi- 
cians shook their heads over her and the King knew 
not what to do. Said she, then, to him, “O my father, 
press me not to wed this man now, but give me a 
month in which to recover my health.” To this he 
agreed, and meanwhile he made the scoundrel Bar- 
kulku his royal guest in the palace and treated him 
with all favor as his son and heir to his kingship. 



BOY WHO WAS BROTHER TO THE DRAGUE 273 
Now as for Zjermi, he went as far as he went, riding 
night and day till he came to the fork of the road 
where he had parted from his brother Handa. There 




274 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

art on the right trail. One with thy features, but with 
dark hair and eyes, entered this forest a month ago 
to find the Beautiful-of-the-Earth who has her palace 
in its center. No doubt he has fallen into the clutches 
of the Mamadreqja who guards her, and thou wilt 
never more see him in life. Nor shall I see thee again 
if thou art fool enough to follow him.” 

But Zjermi answered fiercely, “If the old Witch 
Grandmother has harmed him she shall suffer for it!” 

Said the old man, “Thou mayest not, for thy life, 
enter the palace gateway or touch its wall, till the 
Mamadreqja has lifted the spell she has laid on them, 
and how canst thou compel her to do that?” 

Now Zjermi remembered what Zef, his blood- 
brother, had told him of the power of the Kuchedra’s 
tongue that was coiled about his waist, and he 
answered, “I carry that which no evil magic can 
withstand.” 

Said the old man, “Then thou art well armed, and 
good luck to thee! Remember that all things that 
live hereabout are her slaves and that she can assume 
any form she desires to deceive thee!” 

Zjermi bade him farewell and rode into the forest. 
He rode two hours and three, and at length the 
Mamadreqja, prowling the wood, scented him. When 
she saw him she said to herself, “He has the very 



BOY WHO WAS BROTHER TO THE DRAGUE 275 
features of the last one. They are twins and I shall 
take him as I took his brother.” 

So she assumed the form of the maiden in the bro- 
cade robe, and cried out to him, “0 Sir, whoever thou 
art, help me in my distress.” 

When he saw her he thought, “She is not lovely 
enough to be the Beautiful-of-the-Earth. What if' 
she should be the Old-Woman-of-the-Wood herself?” 
And he answered, “Long life to thee, maiden! What 
ill has caught thee?” 

She replied, “I have walked over-much and weari- 
ness has overtaken me. I pray thee, take me up on 
thy horse and carry me to my palace, which is not 
far away, and thou shalt have my gratitude.” 

Said he, “Gladly!” and bending down, lifted her 
and set her before him on the saddle. 

Now as he did so his girdle touched her side and 
she began to tremble exceedingly, so that he asked, 
“Art thou ill?” 

“Nay,” she answered, “but I have an injured hand 
and thy girdle chafes it. Take it off and throw it from 
thee, and thou shalt have a girdle of woven gold to 
take its place.” 

At that he knew her for the Mamadreqja. Said he, 
“Willingly,” and began to unwind his girdle. But in- 
stead of dropping it on the ground he threw the end 



276 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

of the Kuchedra’s tongue about her waist and bound 
her to him so that she could not escape. And imme- 
diately her brocade robe turned to dirty leather and 
her maiden’s form became that of the old Witch 
Grandmother, with a nose like a field sickle and her 
one remaining hand black and hairy and clawed like 
an eagle’s. 

Feeling herself thus trapped, she shrieked a terrible 
shriek and put forth all her strength, biting and 
scratching like a lynx, but her magic was powerless 
against the Kuchedra’s tongue, and when he drew 
his dagger and set it against her scrawny throat, 
she ceased to struggle. 

Said she, grinding her teeth, “Well, thou hast 
beaten me. What price must I pay for my life?” 

He answered, “Thou shalt lift thy spell from the 
Beautiful-of-the-Earth, and releasing all in her pal- 
ace from their enchantment, take thy wicked magic 
from this forest forever.” 

She was obliged to agree to this, and before he re- 
leased her, he made her guide him to the palace, from 
which she lifted her spell, and all the statues in its 
garden — princes and heroes from many lands, above 
a hundred of them — came to life, his brother Handa 
among them. The twins embraced one another, after 
which Zjermi called the Beautiful-of-the-Earth, and 



BOY WHO WAS BROTHER TO THE DRAGUE 277 
said he, “AH of this company came hither to win 
thee to wife. Which of them dost thou desire?” Then 
she went to Handa and kissed him on the cheek, say- 
ing, “It is thee I love and no other.” 

Now the other princes said to Zjermi, “Thou who 
hast rescued us all shouldst be the one to have her.” 
But he answered, “Nay, for I have fallen in love 
with a princess in a distant land. Having now found 
and freed my brother, I shall return to wed her and 
make that land my home forever.” 

Said they, then, “What can we do to show our. 
gratitude?” 

He answered, “Our father. King Sokol, was 
cheated of his throne by an enemy who seized the 
rule. If ye will, before ye return to your own coun- 
tries, go with my brother and help him to take back 
his rightful place.” 

When the two brothers had wished one another 
long life and happiness, Handa set forth, with the 
Beautiful-of-the-Earth as his bride, leading the com- 
pany of princes. When they reached the border of 
his land, King Sokol’s enemy, who had seized the 
throne, ordered his army to oppose them, but half 
of the soldiers — who had loved King Sokol and hated 
the usurper — seeing the noble multitude who had 
come to right the wrong, threw down their arms and 



ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 
would not fight. So that Handa’s company, in a single 
charge, completely defeated them and slew the false 
King and seated Prince Handa on the throne, to the 
joy of the people. 

As for Zjermij when he had sought out the old man 
on the edge of the forest and wished him long life, he 
set out straightway for the land of the Princess 
Bardha-Kuqe. When he arrived at its capital lo, he 
found the city decorated with flags and flowers. He 
asked a bystander the cause of this, and the man 
answered, “Thou must, indeed, be a stranger. The 
city is in festival because our Princess, the White- 
Red One, this very hour is to wed the hero who a 
month ago saved her from the Kuchedra.” 

Asked he, “Who is this hero?” 

The other replied, “His name is Barkulku, and our 
King will make him his son, to rule after him.” 

When he heard this, Zjermi guessed what had hap- 
pened. Without waiting he spurred his horse to the 
palace, and riding straight over the guards who 
would have stopped him, with his silver sword in his 
hand strode into the room where the marriage crowns 
were about to be placed upon the heads of the bridal 
pair, and where at sight of him the Princess Bardha- 
Kuqe cried out from joy, while the brazen-faced Bar- 
kulku trembled like a whipped dog. 



BOY WHO WAS BROTHER TO THE DRAGUE 279 

Said Zjermi, “I have come for my bride. How is 
it that I find her about to be wedded to another?” 

Cried the King, “What! Darest thou say this, who 
didst fly in terror of the Kuchedra and leave my 
daughter to her fate?” 

Answered Zjermi, “That I did not, though this liar 
would have had thee so believe.” 

Exclaimed the cowardly Barkulku, “It is he that 
is the liar. Did I not bring to thee the beast’s head, 
that is still set on a spear point in the palace court- 
yard?” 

Said Zjermi, “0 King’s Majesty, have the head 
brought before us, and I will prove to thee that I 
speak truly.” 

The King gave command to his guards and the 
Kuchedra’s head was brought, when Zjermi said to 
Barkulku, “What is missing from it?” 

He replied, “Nothing.” 

Said Zjermi to the guards, “Look in its mouth.” 

They did so, and said they, “Its tongue has been 
severed.” 

Then Zjermi took the tongue from under his girdle 
and threw it down before the King. “There, King’s 
Majesty,” he said, “is the creature’s tongue, which 
I cut from it with my sword, before I gave the Prin- 
cess to this villain’s care to bear back to thee.” 



280 ALBANIAN WONDER TALES 

Then, seeing his lie exposed, at the terrible look the 
King cast upon him Barkulku threw himself at his 
feet praying for mercy. But the King bade his sol- 
diers drag him to the courtyard and strike off his head 
and set it beside the Kuchedra’s. 

So this was straightway done and Zjermi wedded 
Bardha-Kuqe in a festival that lasted a whole month. 
They two lived in happiness to their last hour, and in 
time he ruled that land in the King’s stead. 

Up and down the staircase runs this tale. 

Ducats on thy forehead! Go a smooth trail! 



SOME OF THE WORDS IN THESE STORIES 
HOW TO SAY THEM AND WHAT THEY MEAN 


Bardha-Kuqe (Bar-dz-Koo-k 9 ye) 
Barkulku (Bark-oo/-koo) 
BeautifuI-of-the-Earth 
Beiram (Bay-ram) 

Bey (Bay) 

Bor (Bore) 

Bousouka (Boo-joo-ka) 

Dervish (D^r-vish) 

Dif 

Drague (Drag-oo-aye) 

Gheg (Geg) 

Gizari (Ghi-zar-ee) 

Gjelosh (G'ya y-lash) 

Gjuro (fi'yu-xo) 

Imer (2k-mer) 

Jijapajumas (Gee-ya-pa-yw-mas) 
Karrakush (Kara -koosh) 

Kuchedra (Koo-cAay-dra) 

Lubiya (Loo-£**-ya) 

Lukja (Look-yz) 

Mamadreqja (Mama-dray-k*ya) 

Marash (Mare-axA) 

Marko (ilfar-ko) 

Mingo (Ming-go) 

Mira (Mee- ra) 


“ White-Red” A woman 9 s name 
“ Wolf-Belly 99 A man 9 s name 
The Albanian Sleeping-Beauty 
A supernatural donkey that 
guards buried treasure 
A hereditary land-owner. 
“Snow” A woman 9 s name 
A lute 

A member of a Mahometan sect 
A giant that eats human flesh 
A flying-man 

A native of northern Albania 
“Cheese-Eater ” The name of a 
nightingale of wonderful song 
A man 9 s name 
A man f s name 
A man's name 
A kind of fairy 

A great bird. The Albanian coun- 
terpart of the Arabian Roc 
A monstrous supernatural crea- 
ture that haunts rivers 
A forest-ogress 
A woman's name 
“ Devil-mother 99 The old grand- 
mother of the witches 
A man's name 
A man's name 
The name of a horse 
Female spirits who appear at a 
child? s birth to decree its fate 


281 



SOME OF THE WORDS IN THESE STORIES 
HOW TO SAY THEM AND WHAT THEY MEAN 


Ndrek (N’drek) 

Noiteshe (No-ee-tayrA-eh) 
Ora (0A-ra) 


Palok (Pal-/oA) 

Pjeter (P'yay-ter) 

Qerim (K ’ye-reem) 

Qyrumbeti (K'yu-rum-A^y-tee) 
Rasim (Ra s-eem) 

Rexh (Rej) 

Scutari (<Scoo*-a-ree) 

Sheqir (Shek-^/zr) 

Shtoyzavalle (Shtoy-za-ca A/-leh) 

Shtriga (Shiree-grt) 

Sokol (So -kol) 

Tinglimajmun (Ting-lee-my- 
moon) 

Thopch 

Toshk 

Visojidha (Vis-oy-^-da) 

Zjermi (Zee-^-mee) 


A marts name 
The name of a dog 
Friendly spirits of the air who 
can foresee and foretell one’s 
future 

A marts name 
A marts name 
A marts name 
A marts name 
A marts name 
A marts name 
A city in northern Albania 
A marts name 

Invisible spirits of the air y once 
Angels but now forbidden to 
enter Paradise 

A witch living in the underworld 
A marts name 

“Jingle-Monkey ” A fanciful 
place of wonders 
A friendly dwarf living in the 
underworld 

A native of southern Albania 
A marts name 
A marts name 


28 z 








